---
layout: post
title: Omar Mohamed's Important Choices
book_author: Victoria Jamieson and Omar Mohamed
categories: 10-12
image: when-the-stars-are-scattered.jpg
---
_When the Stars are Scattered_ (2020), by Victoria Jamieson and Omar Mohamed,
relates Omar’s experiences and the choices he makes in a refugee camp as a
child. When violence threatens their lives in Somalia, Omar and his younger
brother Hassan flee to Ifo, a refugee camp in Kenya, and one of the largest in
the world. For years, Omar and Hassan, who is nonverbal, live in a tent alone.
Without his parents, Omar must choose his friends, role models, and his own
self-talk carefully. Omar chooses to spend time with friends that accept his
brother as well, chooses to listen to adults that support his education, and
chooses to focus on gratitude instead of resentment.

# Omar spends time with peers that include his brother

While Omar’s brother, Hassan, does endure unkindness from some other children,
Omar carefully selects the people with whom they spend the most time. One boy,
Ali, lives near the brothers, and disparages Hassan. When Hassan doesn’t
understand a game the boys play, Ali says to Omar: “I don’t know why you bother
taking care of this moron! He’s a waste of space. You should let him wander off
into the bush to get eaten by lions! Now I know why you’re orphans. That’s
probably why your mom left you…” (p. 77). Ali calls Hassan names, says Hassan is
worthless, that Omar should leave Hassan to die, and that Omar’s mother doesn’t
want to be with her children because of Hassan’s disability. Ali’s cruel
behavior upsets both the brothers. Fortunately, the boys spend more time with
friends that know better. Jeri, who has a disability of his own, explains to
Omar that Hassan isn’t helpless. Jeri says: “There are lots of things [Hassan] can
do, even with a disability...He takes care of animals, and he helps your
neighbors...don’t underestimate him” (p. 80). Jeri defends Hassan and insists
that Hassan is a meaningful member of their community. He highlights how helpful
and kind Hassan is to people and animals. Another friend, Maryam, assures Omar:
“You're not the only one who cares for [Hassan]...” and “[Hassan is] more
capable than you think he is” (p. 107). Maryam cares for Hassan and believes in
him. When Hassan is younger, Maryam looks after him in the afternoons. When he
is older, Maryam trusts Hassan to help her care for her own children. As a young
mother, Maryam is “... especially grateful for [Hassan’s] help...Hassan is very
attentive to little Nimo, and he loves playing with her” (p. 224). Maryam
includes Hassan in her life and treats him like a member of her own family.
Although there are times when other children such as Ali treat Hassan badly,
Hassan receives far more consistent support from Omar’s friends such as Jeri and
Maryam.

# Omar listens to adults that encourage his education

Not all the adults in Ifo see the value of an education, but Omar chooses to
take the advice of the adults that encourage him to go to school. When Omar and
his friends see Jeri’s father, the children tell him about what they want to be
when they grow up. Jeri’s father says, “I can tell you what you’ll be - you’ll
be a refugee...Us refugees, we are nothing but slave labor around here...You’re
in a prison right now. A giant, sprawling prison - and you’ll spend the rest of
your life here” (p. 127-128). Jeri’s father tells the young students that they
are refugees in a prison, that they can not make decent money with any job in
the camp, and that they will never leave the camp. His perspective is hopeless.
Thankfully, other adults in Omar’s life encourage him. Omar’s foster mother in
the refugee camp, Fatuma, reassures Omar, “We never know what will happen in our
lives...So stay in school. Prepare yourself and educate yourself, so you can be
ready...life is only a prison if you make it one” (p. 129-130). Despite Fatuma’s
many profound losses, Fatuma encourages Omar to have hope and to apply himself
to his studies. The Spanish social worker, Susana Martinez, also encourages Omar
and his classmates. She tells Omar’s class: “You are all strong, resilient
children, and I see so much potential in this room. I hope you’ll keep up with
your studies. If you have any problems - at home, or at school - you can always
talk to a UN officer. We are here to help” (p. 155). Susana Martinez tells Omar
and his peers that they impress her, and that they can come to her if they need
help. Later, she does help Omar when she buys him the new uniform he needs for
high school. Instead of adults like Jeri’s father, Omar chooses to listen to
adults such as Fatuma and Susana Martinez, who say that if he perseveres as a
hopeful, hardworking student, he can be successful.

# Omar focuses on positive thinking

There are times when Omar resents his situation, but more often, Omar thinks
positive thoughts and focuses on the people he appreciates. When Omar can’t
sleep one night, he thinks about his uncomfortable sleeping mat, and the reality
that he may never be able to leave the refugee camp. He muses: “Why do some kids
have everything, and I have nothing? It’s not fair” (p. 137). After one
particularly difficult incident, however, Omar takes stock of his life. He
relates, “I don’t know if it’s praying...but I drift off to sleep staring at my
brother, and I thank God for all the good things we have” (p. 109). While
negative thoughts keep Omar awake at night, he finds that when he thinks
positive thoughts, he is able to fall asleep peacefully. Omar is grateful for
his life with his brother, Hassan, his closest relative and the person he sleeps
beside each night. Omar also appreciates his best friend in Ifo. He thinks, “I’m
thankful for Jeri. At least we are here together. We’ll always have each other’s
back” (p. 231). Jeri and Omar spend much of their time together, and Jeri often
defends and encourages his friend (p. 23, 41). Omar knows he can rely on Jeri.
Besides Jeri, Omar knows there are other people in Ifo that support him and his
brother. He reminds himself: “I am lucky. So many people love and support me and
Hassan. Fatuma, Salan, Maryam, Jeri, all of our neighbors. I can have faith in
my community...We may be refugees and orphans, but we are not alone” (p. 111).
Fatuma cares for Omar and Hassan in place of their parents. Salan organizes for
Omar to attend school and private English lessons. Maryam also encourages Omar
to go to school, and helps care for Hassan. When Omar thinks of his brother, his
best friend, and the support he receives from his community, he feels grateful
for what he has.

Omar spends over a decade in the Ifo refugee camp, where he must serve as the
head of a two person family. As he is responsible for his life and his brother’s,
Omar’s choices determine the present and future quality of their lives. Omar
chooses inclusive friends, decides to trust hopeful adults, and fills his mind
with gratitude in order to establish a good life for himself and Hassan. Much of what happens in Omar’s life, he cannot
control. However, Omar’s story shows that even in the most dire situations,
people always have choices. 

---
References

Jamieson, V. & Mohamed, O. (2020). _When the stars are scattered_. Dial Books
for Young Readers.
