---
layout: post
title: Oppression Persists
book_author: Marjane Satrapi
categories: 18+
image: persepolis.jpg
---

Born in 1969, Marjane Satrapi is about ten years old when the Islamic republic
replaces the Pahlavi dynasty in Iran. In her 2003 graphic novel, _Persepolis_,
Marjane Satrapi recounts the fall and exile of the last Shah of Iran, and the
rise of the Islamic republic. Marjane’s family protests against the Shah, and
after the 1979 revolution, the family also protests against the Islamic
republic. The change in power from the royal family to the republic does not
bring the social justice that the Satrapis and many others seek. Through
Marjane’s eyes, divisions in social class, absolute power, and violence remain
the same before and after the revolution.

# Divisions in Social Class

As a little girl, Marjane observes stark differences between the social classes.
Marjane shares of her family’s maid, Mehri: “like most peasants, she didn’t know
how to read and write…” (p. 35). In 1978, when Mehri falls in love with the
Satrapis’ neighbor, the adults involved quickly end the connection. Marjane’s
father explains to Marjane, “You must understand that their love was impossible.
Because in this country you must stay within your own social class” (p. 37).
Marjane and many of her family members despise the division between rich and
poor. Marjane’s grandfather expresses: “It disgusts me that people are condemned
to a bleak future by their social class” (p. 23). Marjane’s uncle, Anoosh, hopes
that one day, “The proletariat shall rule! It’s inevitable!” (p. 62). Marjane
understands, “The reason for my shame and for the revolution is the same: the
difference between social classes” (p. 33). Following the overthrow of the Shah,
however, the poor remain disempowered. Marjane’s family maid after the
revolution, Mrs. Nasrine, worries when the Islamic republic recruits her
fourteen-year-old son for service. Marjane’s cousin, Shahab, confirms of the
Iranian military, “It’s awful. Every day I see buses full of kids arriving. They
come from the poor areas, you can tell...first they convince them that the
afterlife is even better than disneyland...they hypnotize them and just toss
them into battle. Absolute carnage” (p. 101). The Islamic regime uses poor,
vulnerable young men to fight. Under the Shah, and the Islamic republic, there
exists a marginalized class.

# Absolute Power

Marjane’s father tells her about the events surrounding Reza Shah Pahlavi’s rise
to power. He tells her, “At the time, your grandpa was a young man and the
father of the Shah confiscated everything he owned” (p. 23). With the support of
the British government, Reza Shah Pahlavi seems to have the power to do whatever
he likes. After the 1979 revolution, Marjane and her family continue to feel the
pressures of an all powerful government. The new Islamic regime begins to
control every aspect of life. Marjane remembers: “And then suddenly in 1980…‘all
bilingual schools must be closed down. They are symbols of capitalism. Of
decadence’”(p. 4). Marjane can no longer attend her French, non-religious school
for boys and girls. The regime also judges what is appropriate to wear. Marjane
explains, “Then came 1980: The year it became obligatory to wear the veil at
school. We didn’t really like to wear the veil, especially since we didn’t
understand why we had to” (p. 3). Marjane and other women and girls must adhere
to the government’s social rules. Marjane experiences firsthand the:
“...guardians of the revolution, the women’s branch. This group had been added
in 1982, to arrest women who were improperly veiled. (Like me, for example)” (p.
132). Even as a child, if Marjane doesn’t dress according to the regime’s
standards, the authorities have the power to detain her indefinitely. The
Islamic regime strictly enforces the new expectations.

# Violence

Under the royal family, Marjane’s parents tell her that her grandfather, “...was
often sent to prison. Sometimes they put him in a cell filled with water for
hours...The poor man! Prison had destroyed his health” (p. 24-25). Marjane’s
grandfather endures torture while the royal family rules. Marjane and her family
protest the Shah’s rule, but face violence when they do. One day which people
come to know as Black Friday: “...there were so many killed in one of the
neighborhoods that a rumor spread that Israeli soldiers were responsible for the
slaughter. But in fact it was really our own who had attacked us. After Black
Friday, there was one massacre after another. Many people were killed” (p. 39).
The Satrapis risk their lives to oppose the Shah of Iran. However, with the new
Islamic regime, they remain in danger. A year after the 1979 revolution,
Marjane’s parents bring her with them to a demonstration against fundamentalism.
Marjane remembers: “I passed out flyers...when suddenly things got nasty. For
the first time in my life, I saw violence with my own eyes. That was our last
demonstration” (p. 76). Under the royal family and the Islamic republic,
protesters fear for their lives. The republic begins to target specific people,
and executes Marjane’s uncle, Anoosh. Marjane shares: “My uncle was imprisoned
by the Shah’s regime, but it was the Islamic regime that ordered his
execution...we’ve gone from 3,000 prisoners under the Shah to 300,000 prisoners
under [the Islamic] regime” (p. 144). Marjane sees how both the Shah and the
republic torture and kill people.

Marjane Satrapi and her family experience the repressive rule of one form of
government and then another. While rule changes from the Shah to the Islamic
republic, many of the problems remain the same. Under the Shah, Marjane and her
family members call for a more egalitarian society. With the fall of the Shah,
however, the family does not see a significant expansion of opportunity for the
oppressed. In fact, power remains in the tight control of the government. Under
both regimes, Marjane and her family are at the mercy of the government
regarding property, education, and even dress. Worst of all, the Satrapi family
learns that opposition to either government may result in torture and murder.

---
References

Satrapi, M. (2003). _Persepolis: The story of a childhood_. Pantheon Books.
