---
layout: post
title: The Fundamentals of Antiracism
book_author: Ibram X. Kendi
categories: 16-18
image: antiracist.jpg
published: false
---

_How to be an Antiracist_ (2019), by [Dr. Ibram X. Kendi](https://www.ibramxkendi.com/media), explains that antiracism is the necessary opposition to racism
in the United States. In order to effectively oppose racism, Dr. Kendi stresses
that people must understand some fundamental, albeit challenging, aspects of
antiracism: good ideas and work reflect an understanding of policy, equality,
and inclusivity.

# Antiracism Focuses on Policy

Dr. Kendi urges people to focus on equitable policy change to combat racism. He
stipulates that an antiracist world is possible “...if we focus on power instead
of people, if we focus on changing policy instead of groups of people” (pp.
10-11). Dr. Kendi refers to policies surrounding health, education, voting, and
incarceration. Policy must be race-conscious in order to establish a more
equitable reality. Dr. Kendi quotes President Lyndon B. Johnson’s words: “You do
not take a person who, for years, has been hobbled by chains and liberate him,
bring him up to the starting line of a race and then say, ‘you are free to
compete with all the others,’ and still justly believe that you have been
completely fair” (p. 19). New policies must account for the centuries of
oppression that affect present-day communities of color.

American history does not reflect a linear progression of antiracism. While
antiracist policies continue to come into existence, so do racist policies. Dr.
Kendi insists that “History duels: the undeniable history of antiracist
progress, the undeniable history of racist progress” (p. 33). For example, the
1868 Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States affords
people equal protection under the law. However, the 1896
United States Supreme Court decision in the _Plessy v. Ferguson_ case, rules
that people of color do not have equal rights to White spaces. The _Plessy v. Ferguson_ decision
illustrates one step backwards in the nation's progress, and the national standard of racial segregation for the first half of
the 20th century.

# Antiracism Battles Segregation and Assimilation

Antiracism competes against the two distinctly racist ideologies of segregation
and assimilation. Segregationists tend to dehumanize people of color, and claim
that people of color are biologically or genetically inferior to White people.
Segregationist policies traditionally reflect efforts to kill, enslave,
separate, incarcerate, or deport people of color (p. 31). Segregationist
policies continue to exist: “Racist voting policy has evolved from
disenfranchising by Jim Crow voting laws to disenfranchising by mass
incarceration...” (p. 22). Although segregationist policies may look different
across history, they similarly bar people of color from full participation in
society.

The promotion of assimilation can be harder to recognize. Assimilationist ideas
infantilize people of color, and believe that people of color often exhibit
cultural or behavioral inferiority to White people. Assimilationist beliefs
imply that people of color require White people to educate them. The
assimilationist approach trusts that if people of color strive for the same
cultural standards as White people, they can become just as civilized, or
developed, as White people (p. 31). Both segregationist and assimilationist
ideas support a racial hierarchy that places Whiteness as the ideal at the top.
Antiracism understands that racial groups are inherently equal, and no one
racial group requires development (p. 24).

# Antiracism Supports All People

Dr. Kendi stresses that support for people of color does not vilify White
people. He insists, “To be antiracist is to never conflate racist people with
White people, knowing there are antiracist Whites and racist non-Whites'' (p.
128). Anybody, regardless of race, can promote meaningful antiracist work.
Furthermore, the affirmation of people of color does not diminish White people.
For example, “To be antiracist is not to reverse the beauty standard...To be an
antiracist is to diversify our standards of beauty…” (p. 113). Antiracists do
not seek to marginalize White people; instead, they hope to make room for people
of color as well.

True antiracist work supports _all_ people of color, regardless of additional
identities. Antiracism rejects not only racism, but social hierarchies of any
kind. Dr. Kendi suggests that the fight against racism must also consider
classism, colorism, sexism, ethnocentrism, homophobia, and transphobia. Support
for people of color includes, for example, poor and wealthy people,
light-skinned as well as dark-skinned people, and men and women.

Dr. Kendi understands that antiracism is ongoing work. He argues, “...there
is no neutrality in the racism struggle. The opposite of ‘racist’ isn’t ‘not
racist.’ It is ‘antiracist’” (p. 9). Individuals must actively choose to make
antiracist decisions. In order to make antiracist decisions, Dr. Kendi explains
various nuanced realities. Regarding policy, the key understandings are that the
United States requires equitable policies that address the wrongs of history,
and that racist policies continue to exist. People must also recognize the
inherent equality of value across groups of people, and be careful not to
consider White culture the ideal against which everyone is judged, or towards
which everyone must strive. Finally, antiracism rejects oppression of all kinds.

---
References

Kendi, Ibram X. (2019). _How to be an antiracist_. One World.
