---
layout: post
title: Examine the Primary Sources Related to Events in _They Called Us Enemy_
book_author: George Takei
categories: 10-12
image: they-called-us-enemy.jpg
published: false
---

In his graphic memoir, _They Called Us Enemy_ (2019), George Takei relates
his firsthand experience of [internment
camps](https://www.archives.gov/education/lessons/japanese-relocation) in the
United States during the 1940s. The collection of primary sources from the
[U.S. National Archives and Records Administration](https://www.archives.gov/)
provides further information regarding the speeches, orders, people, and events
that George Takei mentions.

### December 1941

December 7, 1941, the Empire of Japan bombs Pearl Harbor in Hawaii. The next
day, U.S. President Franklin Delano Roosevelt (FDR) delivers his “[Day of
Infamy”
speech](https://www.docsteach.org/documents/document/day-of-infamy-speech), in
which he asks Congress to declare war against the Japanese Empire. Congress
agrees and the U.S. enters WWII.

### February 1942

About two months after the bombing at Pearl Harbor, FDR signs [Executive Order
9066](https://www.docsteach.org/documents/document/executive-order-9066). The
order authorizes the military to remove people from their homes in the United
States and relocate them. Following the order, the U.S. government targets
people of Japanese ancestry on the West Coast.

### April 1942

Throughout the Spring of 1942, the U.S. government issues [Civilian Exclusion
Orders](https://www.docsteach.org/documents/document/exclusion-order). The
orders force people of Japanese descent from their homes and into internment
camps across the country. Soldiers move George Takei and his family from
California, as far as Camp Rohwer in Arkansas.

### March 1943

The U.S. needs more soldiers to fight in the war, and thousands of Japanese
Americans volunteer. The U.S. military forms the [442nd Regimental Combat
Team](https://www.docsteach.org/documents/document/army-navy-no-45), a
segregated Japanese American unit. Many Japanese American soldiers fight
overseas, while their families remain confined to camps in the United States.

### August 1988

U.S. President Ronald Reagan condemns the decision to intern 120,000 people of
Japanese ancestry during WWII. The President signs the [Japanese-American
Internment Compensation
Bill](https://www.docsteach.org/documents/document/signing-internment-compensation),
which provides $20,000 for each of the 60,000 surviving internees.

Watch George Takei explain why the injustice of his internment is relevant
today, and how plays, novels, television, and other contemporary media can help
educate the public.
<br>
<div class="resp-container">
  <iframe
    class="resp-iframe"
    src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/mOrXFUDIbYs"
    frameborder="0"
    allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture"
    allowfullscreen
    >
  </iframe>
</div>
<br>

---
Eisinger, J., Scott, S., Takei, G. (2019). _They called us enemy_. Top Shelf Productions.
