---
layout: post
title: "John Lewis: How a Young Person can Change the World"
book_author: John Lewis, Andrew Aydin, Nate Powell
categories: 13-15
image: march-book-1.jpg
---

The graphic novel, _March: Book One_ (2013), by Congressman John Lewis, Andrew
Aydin, and artist Nate Powell, shares how John Lewis’s productive behaviors as a
young man allows him to be an effective force of change even in his school
years. Born in Alabama in 1940, John Lewis plays a key role in the [American
civil rights
movement](https://www.britannica.com/event/American-civil-rights-movement). As a
young person, John Lewis observes and thinks carefully about his surroundings,
seeks information through newspapers, books, and radio, and involves himself
with his community.

# Reflect

_March: Book One_ begins with a portrayal of the great John Lewis’s simple
childhood ability to take stock of his surroundings. On the bus ride to school
in the 1950s, Lewis notices that the roads and buses to school are different for
white children and black children: “The county didn't bother paving roads into
‘colored’ communities unless it was necessary for white traffic to pass through.
Our bus itself was an old hand-me-down, just like our schoolbooks. I realized
how old it was when we...passed the white children’s buses” (p. 48). He also
notices that the white schools have “...nice playground equipment outside -
nothing like our cluster of small cinderblock buildings with a dirt field out
back for recess” (p. 48). Lewis sees the specific ways in which spaces for black
children receive fewer investments than spaces for white children. On the bus
ride to school, Lewis also remembers: “We drove past prison work gangs almost
every day. The prisoners were always black. As were the folks working in the
fields beyond them. You couldn’t help but notice” (p. 49). During his childhood
in Alabama, Lewis observes the forced labor of black prisoners and the hard
field work of free black people on a daily basis. One year, Lewis’s Uncle Otis
takes him on a special road trip from Alabama to Ohio. Lewis understands that
“Stopping for gas and bathroom breaks took careful planning. Uncle Otis had made
this trip before, and he knew which places along the way offered ‘colored
bathrooms’...it wasn’t until we got into Ohio that I could feel Uncle Otis
relax” (p. 38). Lewis sees that within the United States, travel for people of
color comes with challenges and dangers; he senses his uncle’s wariness during
their journey throughout southern states. As a child, Lewis thinks about what
race means for black children and adults in the United States.

# Learn

As John Lewis becomes aware and interested in his surroundings, he actively
tries to obtain as much information as he can. Lewis reads the newspaper and
listens to the radio in order to learn about current events. In 1954, Lewis
remembers:

> I read a headline that just turned my world upside down. The U.S. Supreme
> Court had handed down its decision in the school desegregation case of Brown
> vs. The Board of Education of Topeka. The doctrine of ‘separate but equal’ -
> upon which the entire institution of segregation was based - had been ruled
> unconstitutional. I was so excited - surely everything was going to change.
> p. 53-54

The newspaper informs Lewis about national changes. What he reads about the
[Brown vs. Board of
Education](https://www.britannica.com/event/Brown-v-Board-of-Education-of-Topeka)
decision, turns his word “upside down,” and excites him. As he continues to find
more information about the state of the country, he continues to become excited:
“...one Sunday morning in early 1955, I was listening to WRMA...Dr. King’s
message hit me like a bolt of lightning. He applied the principles of the church
to what was happening now, today. It was called the social gospel” (p. 55-56).
[Martin Luther King
Jr.](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Martin-Luther-King-Jr)’s words help
Lewis make a connection between his religious beliefs and social justice. Lewis
describes Dr. King’s words as electrifying for him. Also in 1955, the police
arrest a woman of color named [Rosa
Parks](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Rosa-Parks) when she refuses to sit
in the back of a public bus on account of her race. People begin to talk about
resistance and boycott the buses. Lewis shares, “I listened firsthand to
accounts of what was happening. I followed it almost every day, either in the
papers...or on the radio” (p. 59). Through reading and listening, Lewis learns
about important changes in the law, contemporary leaders such Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr. and Rosa Parks, and the ability people have to change their
environments.

# Act

While he is still in high school, Lewis feels motivated to share his convictions
with his community:


> Dr. King’s example showed me that it was possible to do more as a minister
> than what I had witnessed in my own church. I was inspired. So, five days
> before my sixteenth birthday, I preached my first public sermon…I was
> nervous, but once I warmed up the congregation warmed up too. p. 60

As a teenager, Lewis overcomes his own fears to speak before his fellow church
members. He believes in the importance of communication with others. In 1958,
John Lewis attends Jim Lawson’s workshop on non-violence at the First Baptist
Church in Nashville, Tennessee. Lewis and his colleagues decide to resist the
practice of discrimination at the department store lunch counters, where staff
members refuse to serve people of color. Before they go to sit at the lunch
counters however, they must practice their non-violence resistance. Lewis
relates, “...the hardest part to learn - to truly understand, deep in your
heart, was how to find love for your attacker” (p. 82). Because peaceful
protest is a challenge, the young people role-play situations they might
encounter, and teach themselves how to remain calm and loving in their protest.
The activists of the Nashville Student Movement, as they call their effort,
begin sit-ins at the lunch counters, “and at 3:15 pm on May 10, 1960, those six
downtown Nashville stores served food to black customers for the first time in
the city’s history” (p. 120). _March: Book One_ ends with the department store
lunch counter victory. The integration of the lunch counter shows how Lewis and
other young people come together to plan, practice and effectively enact
resistance to injustice in their community.

_March: Book One_ is a 2013 recollection of John Lewis’s coming of age in mid
20th century America. The graphic novel strives to show young people that if
they pay attention, try to learn as much as they can, and ultimately act on what
they believe is right, they can make positive changes in the world. John Lewis’s
dedication to justice in the 1950s remains a relevant example to young people
over seventy years later.

---
References

Lewis, J., Aydin, A., & Powell, N. (2013). _March: Book one_. Top Shelf Productions.
