---
layout: post
title: The Magic Fish
book_author: Trune Le Nguyen
categories: 13-15
image: magic-fish.jpg
---

In his 2020, _The Magic Fish_, author and illustrator [Trung Le
Nguyen](https://www.trungles.com/) shows how elements of art can communicate
meaning in a graphic novel. Trung Le Nguyen uses the colors to communicate
context, importance, and emotion. He also employs simple shapes to serve as
symbols which help develop characters throughout the novel. Finally, Trung Le
Nguyen includes and omits lines in a way that controls the focus of his scenes.

# Color

Trung Le Nguyen uses the colors blue, yellow, and red to indicate fairy tales,
the past, and present, respectively. The blue fairy tales include three
different stories, about Alera, Tấm, and Ondine. The yellow past depicts Hiền’s
life as a young woman in Vietnam. The red present focuses mainly on Tiến’s life
with his mother and father, Hiền and Vĩnh, and his two friends, Claire and
Julian. The color coding allows Trung Le Nguyen to shift quickly between a fairy
tale, Hiền’s past, and the present without the use of words (p. 28).

![alt_text](/assets/images/magic-fish/magic-fish-01.webp "image_tooltip")

Despite the three different colored contexts, however, the orange color of the
peaches remains consistent. The orange color of the peaches, regardless of
context, highlights the symbol’s importance. Orange peaches first appear in the
red present, on a table in Hiền’s house, and in a frame where Hiền discusses her
sons interests (p. 5). In the next context, the orange color first radiates from
the peach tree in a blue fairy tale, in a frame that describes a sea princess
and the birth of her daughter, Alera (p. 9). The orange peaches appear in a
second fairy tale, where they make their initial appearance in a frame that
describes a loving mother and her daughter, Tấm (p. 132). The consistent orange
color of the fruit suggests that all mothers pass down gifts to their children.

![alt_text](/assets/images/magic-fish/magic-fish-02.webp "image_tooltip")

Trung Le Nguyen communicates grievous scenes with the use of white central
figures against a color background. When Hiền returns to Vietnam to mourn her
mother’s passing, Hiền and her aunt’s white figures contrast against the red
background (p. 129). In another scene with Father Niles, Mrs. Flynn, and Tiến,
the three white figures appear against a red background because Father Niles
claims that when children tell their parents that they are gay, parents feel
grief (p. 172).

![alt_text](/assets/images/magic-fish/magic-fish-03.webp "image_tooltip")

# Shapes

Trung Le Nguyen first shows the shape of the Christian cross to reveal Vĩnh’s
religion (p. 27). In the present, Trung Le Nguyen includes a cross on the wall
of Tiến’s school, and three small crosses on the uniforms of Tiến and his
classmates. The cross on the wall and on the students’ clothes communicates that
Tiến and his friends attend a Christian school (p. 89). When Hiền travels to
Vietnam to mourn her mother, Trung Le Nguyen shows the Christian cross again,
atop a church (p. 129). Hiền and her aunt sit near a casket in the church. The
cross shows the Christian funeral for Hiền’s mother - an event the Trung Le
Nguyen never expresses with words.

![alt_text](/assets/images/magic-fish/magic-fish-04.webp "image_tooltip")

Another shape that Trung Le Nguyen uses throughout _The Magic Fish_ is the star.
He draws the star to designate good people, feelings and events. A star appears
for the first time in the story on the back of the protagonist Tiến’s jacket (p.
3-4). Stars also appear as emanata when Trung Le Nguyen introduces Tiến’s
friend, Julian (p. 43). In one panel with Claire and Tiến at the school dance,
stars appear on Claire’s dress and float in the air around her (p. 156). The
stars that accompany Tiến, Julian, and Claire throughout the story highlight
their goodness and also connect the three friends.

![alt_text](/assets/images/magic-fish/magic-fish-05.webp "image_tooltip")

Trung Le Nguyen shows the peach in three different contexts in _The Magic Fish_.
In each context, he first shows the peaches in a frame with a mother and child.
In each context, he also shows the peaches inside the home where one of the
characters loses one or more family members. The peaches first appear in Hiền’s
home (p. 5), who later in the novel loses her mother. Peaches also appear inside
Alera’s home (p. 18-19), whose mother disappears into the sea and never returns
to Alera. Trung Le Nguyen also depicts peaches in Tấm’s family home, a girl who
loses her mother and father. The peaches connect and highlight the struggles of
three different families.

![alt_text](/assets/images/magic-fish/magic-fish-06.webp "image_tooltip")

# Line

Trung Le Nguen draws lines to make strands of hair and highlight specific
characters. When Tiến tells Claire about his grandmother’s death, the friends
are at school. Trung Le Nguyen illustrates other students in the background, but
the focus remains on Tiến and Claire. The lines that add detail to their hair is
one way in which Trung Le Nguyen keeps the focus on the friends (p. 125). When
Hiền visits her aunt in Vietnam, Hiền’s aunt tells her a fairy tale. Again, the
lines of their hair separate them from the other people in the scene and keep
the focus on Hein and her aunt (p. 147). At the school dance, Mrs. Flynn watches
Tiến and Julian dance from a distance. Although she stands far away, Trung Le
Nguyen draws lines in her hair in order to draw attention to her watchful
presence (p. 160).

![alt_text](/assets/images/magic-fish/magic-fish-07.webp "image_tooltip")

Another way Trung Le Nguyen shifts focus is through the use of silhouette. When
Prince Maxwell IV and Alera speak to each other at his birthday party, the
guests furthest away reduce to simple silhouettes (p. 57). Trung Le Nguyen
similarly depicts a beach scene in Vietnam. In the foreground, a woman and child
appear in more detail. Behind them are two more people at the beach, but any
details to distinguish them are unnecessary - their contours are enough for the
scene (p. 130). As Tiến and Claire enter the school dance, Trung Le Nguyen draws
only the contours of the friends in order to shift the focus to the bright
lights of the school dance in front of them (p. 156).

![alt_text](/assets/images/magic-fish/magic-fish-08.webp "image_tooltip")

Trung Le Nguyen completely omits the panel lines for scenes that depict some of
the most important relationships in _The Magic Fish_. Tiến’s friend Claire
supports Tiến throughout the novel, and as Trung Le Nguyen illustrates, her
compassion for Tiến is invaluable (p. 149). When Tiến’s mother returns from her
trip to Vietnam, Trung Le Nguyen highlights the embrace between the mother and
her child (185). At the end of the novel, Hiền tells her son a story that
concludes with a happy start to a romance between two women. The relationship
between the two women, Bertie and Ondine, confirms not only Hiền’s unconditional
support of her son, but also the power individuals have to change and make new
stories for their families. The relationship between Bertie and Ondine serves to
represent and validate Tiến. As if to emphasize the boundlessness of their
importance, Trung Le Nguyen frees certain relationships of panel lines.

![alt_text](/assets/images/magic-fish/magic-fish-09.webp "image_tooltip")

---
References

Nguyen, T.L., (2020). _The magic fish_. Random House Graphic.
