---
layout: post
title: Why Buck Chooses the North over Man
book_author: Jack London
categories: 13-15
image: the-call-of-the-wild.webp
---

In _The Call of the Wild_ (1903), author Jack London creates a world that
challenges the supremacy of man. London portrays humans as animals like any
other, and  at the same time, consistently personifies dogs and nature in order
to highlight their complexity. From the perspective of the main character, the
dog Buck, humans are relatable but also expendable. When Buck ultimately sheds
the presence of humans in his life, the choice seems natural.

# Humans

Half St. Bernard, half Scotch shepherd dog, Buck recognizes that just like dogs,
humans can have mixed ancestry. One of the first men in the North that Buck
respects is Francois,  “...a French-Canadian half-breed…” (p. 11). Another man
Buck encounters is a nameless “...Scotch half-breed…” (p. 45). Men consider the
breed of other men as well. When John Thornton meets Mercedes, Charles, and Hal,
he listens to them and decides that, “He knew the breed, and he gave his advice
in the certainty that it would not be followed” (p. 64). John Thornton believes
he knows the type of people that Mercedes, Charles, and Hal are. Their
individuality does not impress Thornton, and he believes that the family of three
has the same traits as the others of their kind. Humans, like all animals, come
from various stock, and  live by their instincts and reactions in a harsh world.
When he witnesses an injustice, for example, John Thornton seems to
instinctively intervene: “...suddenly, without warning, uttering a cry that was
inarticulate and more like the cry of an animal, John Thornton sprang upon the
man who wielded the club” (p. 66). John Thornton cries out _inarticulately_,
like an _animal_. He _springs_ upon his target, and uses the strength of his
body rather than a weapon to subdue his target. Buck attacks similarly, in the
manner of: “...an animal the like of which they had never seen before…a live
hurricane of fury, hurling himself upon them in a frenzy to destroy. He sprang
at the foremost man…” (p. 98).  Both Buck and John Thornton attack like animals,
and spring upon their enemies. The similarities of their attacks highlight the
comparable nature of men and dogs when they must fight and have only their own
bodies at their disposal. When Buck kills some men, he reasons: “He had killed
man, the noblest game of all…Thenceforward he would be unafraid of them…” (p.
100). Buck gives men credit for being the _noblest of all_, but still
understands that man is _game_, an animal he can hunt like any other. Once Buck
sees that he is able to kill humans, he no longer feels intimidated by them. In
London’s story, the breeds, bodies, and mortality of humans are unremarkable.

# Dogs

Of all the characters in _The Call of the Wild_, the dog Buck leads the most
interesting and varied life. Buck - not Judge Miller - is the king of their
family’s California property. A description of Buck’s home includes the claim
that “...over this great demesne Buck ruled…in right royal fashion. During the
four years since his puppyhood he had lived the life of a sated aristocrat; he
had a fine pride in himself, was even a trifle egotistical, as country gentlemen
sometimes become because of their situation” (p. 2-3). Buck spends his days like
an _aristocract_ or _country gentleman_, who wants for nothing. He _rules_, in
the typical _royal_ manner, over the estate. His emotions are complicated, as he
is capable of feeling satisfaction, pride, and egotism. Indeed, Buck “...was
king, - king over all creeping, crawling, flying things of Judge Miller’s place,
humans included” (p. 3). Buck occupies the highest position of power and respect
on Judge Miller’s property - no human or animal ranks above him. In the Fall of
1897, however, Buck’s luck drastically changes. The “kidnapped king” (p. 5)
suddenly finds himself on a sled dog team in Dyea, Alaska. Between his more
seasoned colleagues, Dave and Sol-leks, Buck learns the new work: “Apt scholar
that he was, [Dave and Sol-leks] were equally apt teachers, never allowing him
to linger long in error, and enforcing their teaching with their sharp teeth”
(p. 20). In Alaska, the proud, egotistical king quickly becomes the novice
_scholar_ - in a new world where veteran sled dogs (the _teachers_) wield power.
The work and environment invigorates Buck. His new duties consume him and he
soon rises to a position of power himself. At the head of a sled team in the
wild North, a certain kind of joy comes to Buck: “This ecstasy, this
forgetfulness of living, comes to the artist, caught up and out of himself in a
sheet of flame; it comes to the soldier, war-mad on a stricken field and
refusing quarter; and it came to Buck, leading the pack…” (p. 37). In his role
as sled team leader, Buck has the same experiences as dedicated human
professionals in their field. He reaches a place where he feels the same passion
as an _artist_, and the same intensity as a _soldier_. Throughout the adventure
of his life, Buck has similar experiences to kings, scholars, artists, and
soldiers.

# Nature

Like Buck, the “North” (p. 3), or Yukon, also comes to life as a vibrant
character. Soon after his kidnapping, Buck travels north to see the, “Chilcoot
Divide, which stands between the salt water and fresh and guards forbiddingly
the sad and lonely North” (p. 20). Upon his first encounter with the North, the
former king Buck seems to meet a king of the wild. On Buck’s property, “a legion
of housemaids armed with brooms and mops” (p. 2), stand guard. In the wild, the
Chilcoot Divide stands guard. The Divide initially stands between Buck and the
North, a character Buck comes to know as sad and lonely. Like Buck, the North
changes over time. In the Spring, “The Yukon was straining to break loose the
ice that bound it down. It ate away from beneath; the sun ate from above” (p.
64). The Yukon makes a great effort to escape the winter, and _eats_ the ice in
order to break free. Like a good friend, the sun assists the Yukon in its
endeavor. As the Yukon dissolves the ice, it seems to pay no attention to the
location of other living beings. One Spring, Buck observes humans and dogs on
the river ice when suddenly he sees, “...a whole section of ice give way and
dogs and humans disappear. A yawning hole was all that was to be seen” (p. 67).
The Yukon breaks free of winter, and, still sleepy, the Yukon _yawns_ in an
attempt to fully wake for the Spring. Like a giant that cannot be bothered by
insignificant creatures, the Yukon isn’t always aware of what it swallows. The
Yukon can, however, communicate effectively with these creatures when it so
desires. The Yukon communicates with Buck in order to alert him to a significant
event. As Buck traverses the wilderness, he senses that “...the very breeze
whispered of it. Several times [Buck] stopped and drew in the fresh morning air
in great sniffs, reading a message which made him leap on with greater speed”
(p. 97). The Yukon _whispers_ the news to Buck, and he in turn clearly
understands the urgent messages. In London’s world, the Yukon is moody and
powerful, yet subtle and communicative.

A king in California, Buck becomes a lowly scholar, and eventually, with the
help of his canine teachers, a passionate professional in his field. As Buck is
able to adapt, so is the North - which adjusts according to the seasons. Both
Buck and the North exhibit emotion, nuance, and power. They both prove their
ability to overcome humans, who are no more dignified or strong than any other
presence on earth. In his novel, London humbles the race of men. He brings
attention to the significance of dogs and nature in the world. When Buck begins
to live a life among dogs in nature, without humans, Buck’s gains make the
absence of humans no great loss.

---
References

London, J. (2011). _The call of the wild_. Collins Classics. (Original work published 1903)
