---
layout: post
title:  Jarrett Krosoczka's Invaluable Support System
book_author: Jarrett Krosoczka
date:   2023-06-18 17:17:11 +0700
categories: 16-18
image: hey-kiddo.jpg
---

In his memoir, _Hey, Kiddo_ (2018), [Jarrett
Krosoczka](https://www.studiojjk.com/) recounts his childhood in Worcester,
Massachusetts. Throughout his childhood, Jarrett has no contact with his father,
and his mother struggles with a drug addiction. Jarrett lives most of his young
life with his maternal grandparents, Joe and Shirley Krosoczka. Fortunately,
Jarrett’s grandparents take on the roles of Jarrett’s parents. Joe and Shirley
make thoughtful decisions regarding Jarrett’s education, enroll him in
extracurricular activities, and introduce him to work opportunities. Jarrett’s
maternal aunts, Lynn and Holly, provide Jarrett with additional support that he
needs. Jarrett’s aunts help to care for Jarrett, take him to places he needs to
go, and have meaningful conversations with him. Jarrett’s best friend Pat also
plays a significant role in Jarrett’s life. Pat includes, encourages, and
listens to Jarrett throughout their childhood. With the help of his
grandparents, aunts, and a good friend, Jarrett leads a good life, despite the
absence of his mother and father.

# Jarrett's Grandparents

As Jarrett’s parents do not support him, Jarrett’s grandparents, Joe and
Shirley, take on the active role of parenting. Joe and Shirley carefully
consider Jarrett’s education and make decisions that they think are best for
Jarrett. After eighth grade, although Jarrett wants to go to South High,
Jarrett’s grandparents insist on Holy Name. When Jarrett complains to his
grandfather, Joe says to Jarrett, “We talked about this. A kid was just stabbed
and killed [at South High]. You’re not going there” (p. 170). Joe explains to
Jarrett that he thinks South High is unsafe, and thus an undesirable high
school. Because of the danger Joe believes exists at South High, Joe makes the
decision to send Jarrett to another high school. Joe’s choice reflects the
concern he has for Jarrett’s best interest. Jarrett’s grandparents not only act
to keep Jarrett safe, they help Jarrett to cultivate his interests as well. They
recognize Jarrett’s passion for drawing and offer Jarrett an extracurricular
opportunity to pursue art. Jarrett’s grandfather says to him: “...we’d like to
send you to take classes at the Worcester Art Museum…You can choose any class
you want. I earmarked the page for kids 12 and up. Doesn’t matter how much it
costs or what day it’s on - we’ll get you there” (p. 145). Jarrett’s grandfather
wants to support Jarrett’s love for art, so he seeks out additional classes that
Jarrett can take. Joe gives Jarrett choices and clearly tells Jarrett that he
can take whatever class he likes, regardless of the money or time that the class
requires. Jarrett’s grandfather also gives him work experience outside of
school. Joe brings Jarrett to his factory, Sem-Tec, and shows him how to work on
the assembly line. Joe says to Jarrett, “Listen Jarrett, someday you can be a
part of this - if you want. But I don’t want you to think that you have to.
There’s no pressure from me, or Joey or Stephen or anyone for you to go into the
family business” (p. 211). Joe brings Jarrett to work at his factory so he can
gain firsthand experience in a work environment, specifically a work environment
that is a realistic option for Jarrett when he finishes school. Joe tells
Jarrett that the family business is one of his future possibilities. However,
Joe also tells Jarrett that he can do what he wants. In lieu of his parents,
Jarrett’s grandparents support his education and extracurricular interests, and
provide him with work experience.

# Jarrett's Aunts

In addition to his grandparents, Jarrett’s aunts Lynn and Holly play an
important role in Jarrett’s life. As a very young child, Jarrett lives alone
with his mother, and Lynn and Holly are some of the first people to notice that
Jarrett needs a better home. Jarrett explains, “Lynn and Holly would later tell
me that after they babysat me over on Bauer Street, they would come home in
tears, telling Joe and Shirl that they needed to do something. They needed to
get me out of that house” (p. 64). Jarrett’s young aunts, Lynn and Holly, spend
time with Jarrett at his home, and see that Jarrett needs help. Upset by
Jarrett’s home life, teenage Lynn and Holly don’t remain silent, they advocate
for Jarrett. Their outcries contribute to Jarrett’s move to live with his
grandparents. Jarrett’s aunts also help Jarrett with logistical support, such as
car rides. When Jarrett begins to attend classes at the Worcester Art Museum,
his grandfather confirms, “Okay, either me or Lynn or Holly will pick you up
when the class is done” (p. 145). Jarrett is able to attend after-school
activities because he has adults in life who drive him around town. Jarrett can
depend not only on his grandfather, but on his aunts Lynn and Holly as well.
Jarrett remembers, “Lynn and Holly used to drive me around whenever they could…”
(p. 5). The extra support that Lynn and Holly provide allows Jarrett to be more
active in his community. Jarrett’s aunt, Holly, helps Jarrett work through many
of the challenges he encounters. As a teenager, Jarrett contacts his father and
when he tells his grandparents, he thinks that they react negatively. Jarrett
talks to Holly about the situation. Holly says to Jarrett, “[Your grandparents]
were just upset that you didn’t tell them that you replied to [your father’s]
letter…They just don’t want to see you get hurt. Are you going to meet him?” (p.
272). Holly helps diffuse some of the bad feelings that Jarrett has about the
situation, and towards his grandparents. Holly explains to Jarrett that his
grandparents simply want to know about Jarrett’s communication with his
estranged father, and that they want him to stay safe. Holly also asks Jarrett
if he plans to meet his father in person. Her question indicates her confidence
in him to make the best decision for himself. Jarrett’s aunts, Lynn and Holly,
help ensure his safety, give him car rides around town, and talk to him about
the important happenings in his life.

# Jarrett's Friend

When Pat and his family move next to Jarrett and his grandparents, Pat and
Jarrett quickly become friends. When Pat sees that baseball doesn’t really suit
Jarrett, Pat adapts. Pat tells Jarrett, “So…let’s do something else. What toys
do you got?” Pat remains flexible, and happy to engage in an activity with
Jarrett that they can both enjoy. Even though Jarrett isn’t interested in
baseball, which Pat enjoys, Pat remains willing to do other activities with
Jarrett. As the two boys get older, Pat continues to include Jarrett in
activity. When Jarrett expresses his nervousness about a school dance, Pat says
to Jarrett, “It’s not about dancing. Nah, it’s about hanging out. And we only
have a few dances left this year - you’ve got to go to one of them. There’s no
reason to be embarrassed” (p. 162). Pat assures Jarrett that dancing skills are
unimportant, and that he can have fun at a school dance even if he doesn’t know
how to dance. Pat explains that a school dance is just a social gathering that
gives them a chance to spend time with other people from their school. Pat tries
to make Jarrett feel more confident. Jarrett says of Pat, “I pretty much owe my
ability to socialize to Pat” (p. 164). For many years, Jarrett does not know
about his mother’s struggles, or why he lives with his grandparents. When
Jarrett’s grandparents tell Jarrett the truth about his mother, Jarrett tells
Pat, the friend he trusts with this personal information. Pat listens to Jarrett
talk about his mother and simply replies, “I’m sorry. Don’t worry, I won’t [tell
anyone]” (p. 141). Jarrett wants Pat to know the reality of his family, and Pat
listens. Pat offers Jarrett simple comfort and assures Jarrett that he won’t
gossip about Jarrett’s mother to other people. Jarrett’s relationship with his
neighborhood friend, Pat, provides Jared with camaraderie, confidence, and
security.

In _Hey, Kiddo_, graphic novelist Jarrett Krosoczka describes the struggles and
joys of his own childhood. Jarrett’s mother cannot care for her son, and
Jarrett’s father remains unknown to Jarrett until his later teen years. Without
a mother or a father to care for him, Jarrett relies on the love and safety of
his maternal grandparents. Jarrett’s grandmother, Shirley, and grandfather, Joe,
give Jarrett the opportunities that children deserve. They carefully select
Jarrett’s educational, extracurricular, and work experiences. Jarrett’s maternal
aunts also give Jarrett much needed care. From his early childhood, Jarrett’s
aunts fight for Jarrett’s best interest, help with errands, and act as
supportive adults for important conversations in Jarrett’s life. Finally,
Jarrett’s good friend Pat serves as an invaluable presence. Pat plays with
Jarrett at an early age, encourages Jarrett to have confidence and socialize in
their middle school years, and listens to Jarrett when he shares details about
his life. Jarrett’s grandparents, aunts, and his best friend fill the gaps that
his mother and father’s absence create.

---
References

Krosoczka, J. (2018). _Hey, Kiddo_. Graphix.
