---
layout: post
title: Paul Bäumer’s Criticisms of German Authority
book_author: Erich Maria Remarque
categories: 18+
image: all-quiet.jpeg
---

In Erich Maria Remarque’s 1928 novel, _All Quiet on the Western Front_, protagonist
Paul Bäumer communicates his experience as a young German soldier in World War
I, until October of 1918. Paul’s irreverent account serves as the antithesis of
the German agenda at the time. While young Paul discounts German authority,
Germany seeks to promote the empire. War destroys all of Paul’s trust in the
generation before him, including his own father. His mistrust extends to his schooling, as he resents the nationalistic rhetoric of his former schoolmaster
Kantorek, and all schoolmasters like him. In the army, Paul displays open
insolence towards Corporal Himmelstoss, and other army authorities. Paul’s
complete disenchantment with war leads him to criticize the the adults that lead his country, the people he holds responsible for the mess of the First World War.

# Parents

As he and other young men suffer on the battle front, Paul begins to doubt the
older adults who remain safely at home. Paul mentions that one school friend,
Joseph Behm, initially hesitates to join the army. Paul claims, “And perhaps
more of us thought as he did, but no one could very well stand out, because at
that time even one’s parents were ready with the word “coward”; no one had the
vaguest idea what we were in for” (p. 7). Paul laments the pressure on young men
to join the war. No young man wants to seem uncooperative, or have other people,
especially his parents, consider him cowardly. Paul implies that German parents,
in their ignorance and patriotic zeal, betray their own children. He believes
that no one at home understands the true nature of the war. When he returns home
on a short leave, Paul’s father annoys him with questions. Paul says of his
father, “He wants me to tell him about the front; he is curious in a way that I
find stupid and distressing; I no longer have any real contact with him…I
realize he does not know that a man cannot talk of such things…” (p. 90). Mr.
Bäumer’s curiosity regarding the war disappoints and upsets Paul, who claims
that his father’s ignorance prohibits any further meaningful interaction between
father and son. Also during his leave, Paul visits the mother of a killed
soldier. Kemmerich’s mother begs Paul to describe the manner of her son’s death.
Paul lies and tells her a story of an instant death. Kemmerich’s mother suspects
Paul, but he knows, “I will never tell her, she can make mincemeat out of me
first. I pity her, but she strikes me as rather stupid all the same. Why doesn't
she stop worrying? Kemmerich will stay dead whether she knows about it or not”
(p. 98). Paul’s reaction to Kemmerich’s mother shows his disdain for her.
Although he claims to pity her, he seems to view her not as a grieving person he
can relate to, but a pathetic figure. He considers her “stupid,” and deems her
worries pointless. The ignorance, yet overwhelming support of the war that comes
from German parents tarnishes Paul’s opinion of them.

# Teachers

Besides the mothers and fathers in his community, Paul also comes to change his
view on his education and his teachers. Paul and his fellow soldiers, who are
also his former classmates, talk often of their former schoolmaster, Kantorek.
The young men resent Kantorek’s encouragement for them to join the army. Paul remembers:
“...Kantorek gave us long lectures until the whole of our class went, under his
shepherding, to the District Commandant and volunteered…There were thousands of
Kantoreks, all of whom were convinced that they were acting for the best-in a
way that cost them nothing. And that is why they let us down so badly” (p. 7).
Paul compares his former schoolmaster to a shepherd - one that leads his flock
into danger. Kantorek, like many other schoolmasters, exploits the trust his
students have in him. Paul’s first hand experience on the front makes him feel
that the Kantorek does not paint an accurate picture of war. When Kantorek
himself appears in the army, the young men disrespect him. One of Kantorek's former students, Mittelstaedt, now leads Kantorek. Paul watches gleefully as Mittelstaedt teases Kantorek: “Territorial
Kantorek, do you call those buttons polished? You seem as though you can never
learn. Inadequate, Kantorek, quite inadequate…Territorial Kantorek, we have the
good fortune to live in a great age, we must brace ourselves and triumph over
hardship.” (pp. 95-96). The young man humiliates his former teacher with a
public reprimand - Mittelstaedt says that Kantorek’s uniform is unacceptable and
that Kantorek seems unteachable. Mittelstaedt disrespects Kantorek when he uses
the teacher’s own patriotic words about good fortune, greatness, and triumph,
against him. While Paul watches over starving Russian prisoners of war, Paul
observes: “Any noncommissioned officer is more of an enemy to a recruit, any
schoolmaster to a pupil, than they are to us” (p. 105). Paul finds the Russian
prisons more relatable and less threatening to him than a teacher in his own country. As he
looks at the Russian men, Paul realizes they are not the reason he is a soldier.
The trusted mentors in Paul’s own country put him in danger. Paul openly
criticizes his former teacher's support of the war, he and his friends
disrespect the teacher when he arrives for duty himself, and Paul claims to
regard his teacher as more of an enemy than a Russian soldier.

# Army Superiors

Even German officials cannot escape Paul and his friends’ criticism. Paul shares
at length the specific ways that German Corporal Himmelstoss abuses Paul and the
other soldiers of No. 9 platoon. Paul relates how the young soldiers at one
point lose all respect for Corporal Himmelstoss. Finally: “...that was the end
of his authority.” In training, “We obeyed each order, since an order’s an order
and has to be obeyed. But we did it so slowly that Himmelstoss became desperate”
(p. 15). Paul’s confession reveals his platoon’s mass defiance of command. He
explicitly says that the young men cease to respect or trust Corporal
Himmelstoss. While they grudgingly obey him, they do so with an unbelievable
inefficiency that distresses the corporal. One of Paul’s fellow soldiers,
Detering, deserts the army. Paul notices, but says nothing in order to give
Detering some time to get away (p. 148). Paul understands Detering’s choice as
homesickness, but the army doesn’t see it the same way: “A week after we heard
that he had been caught by the field gendarmes, those despicable military
police…Anyone might have known that his flight was only homesickness and a
momentary aberration. But what does a court martial a hundred miles behind the
front-line know about it? We have heard nothing more of Detering” (p. 148). Paul
calls the German military police, “despicable,” and implies the detachment of a
German military court. While Paul understands Detering’s choice as a desperate
moment of weakness, he knows a court martial does not afford soldiers the same
forgiveness. He mentions that the court martial, “a hundred miles behind the
front-line,” is so safely removed from battle, it cannot understand Detering’s
position. Paul’s contempt extends to the height of German society. When the
German Kaiser comes to see the soldiers, Paul recalls: “We stand to attention
and the Kaiser appears…He stalks along the line, and I am really rather
disappointed; judging from his pictures I imagined him to be bigger and more
powerfully built, and above all to have a thundering voice.” Upon seeing the
Kaiser of Germany, Paul simply expresses his disappointment. He claims that the
real Kaiser is smaller and less powerful than in his imagination. Paul clearly
derides Corporals, military policemen, court martials, and even the Kaiser of
Germany.

At the time when German leaders call for dedication to the fatherland, Paul
Bäumer’s voice stands out in shocking defiance. Paul complains of the ignorance
of German parents, including his own father, and he dismisses the mother of one
of his fellow soldiers as a silly person. Paul withdraws from both his father
and Kemmerich’s mother, and refuses to share with them the information they
want. Paul accuses his former schoolmaster Kantorek, and other schoolmasters
like him, of manipulation and the abuse of power. When Kantorek joins his former
pupils in the army, Paul and others mock him. Perhaps worst of all, Paul
disparages the German military. He hates his Corporal Himmelstoss, devalues the
military police and court martials, and finally, speaks disrespectfully of the
Kaiser. As Paul’s words destroy the images of German authority figures (the
country’s parents, teachers, military leaders), the Nazis and their sympathizers
later consider [Paul Maria
Remarque](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/content/en/article/erich-maria-remarque-in-depth)’s
“Un-German” novel, _All Quiet on the Western Front_, [a book they must
burn](https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/content/en/article/book-burning).

---
References

Remarque, E. M. (2013). _All quiet on the western front_. Random House Trade
Paperbacks.
