---
layout: post
title: A Model Friendship
book_author: Jenny Han
categories: 16-18
image: the-summer-i-turned-pretty.jpg
---

Jenny Han’s 2009 novel, _The Summer I Turned Pretty_, illustrates how two very
different people can be best friends. Laurel Dunne, mother of Steven and Isabel
(Belly) Conklin, and Susannah Fisher, mother of Conrad and Jeremiah Fisher, have
the type of friendship that their children admire. Isabel Conklin thinks of
Laurel and Susannah, “I envied their relationship. They were exactly like
copilots, in perfect balance. [They had] the forever kind of friendship that
will last your whole life through, no matter what” (p. 84). Friends since the
age of nine, Laurel and Susannah choose to spend every summer with each other
and the four children at the Fishers’ beach house. Throughout the story, the
women’s strong bond, but also their stark differences become clear. Laurel and
Susannah’s different approaches to daily life, their marriages, and children,
show to Conrad, Jeremiah, Steven, and Isabel, that there is no one right way to
be.

# Behavior

At the beach house, the children witness Laurel and Susannah’s different
behaviors in the home. Isabel notices: “When my mother cooked, it was always
some sort of seafood with lemon and olive oil and a vegetable. Every time” (p.
87). Isabel says, “always” and “every time” to highlight Laurel’s
predictability. When Laurel cooks, she prepares a healthy protein and vegetable.
Isabel describes Susannah differently. Isabel observes: “Susannah only cooked
every once in a while…you never knew what you were going to get. She might spend
the whole whole afternoon puttering around the kitchen, making something I’d
never had before, like Moroccan chicken with figs…Or she might make American
cheese omelets with ketchup and toast” (p. 87). As predictable as Laurel’s
cooking is, the children can never guess what Susannah will make. Susannah cooks
on one end of the culinary spectrum or the other. Her meals are either
international and gourmet or comically simple. One night at the dinner table,
Steven claims casually that they live in a free country. Laurel considers her
son’s words carefully, and responds: “Is it a free country? I want you to really
think about that statement, Steven. What about our civil liberties? Are we
really free if -” (p. 90). Laurel questions Steven, and challenges him to think
more deeply. She steers the direction of the conversation towards the government
and justice. Susannah interrupts Laurel, and requests that they not talk
politics at the dinner table (p. 90). The moment shows Laurel’s tendency to
start more serious conversation, and Susannah’s preference for lighter quality
time. The day before they leave the beach, Laurel, Susannah, and the children
begin to clean the house. Isabel reveals: “What [Laurel] didn’t know was that
Susannah had cleaners come in after we left and before we came back…It was like
a secret between us, and I liked that. My mother actually liked to clean and
didn’t believe in housekeepers or maids or in other people doing what she
considered our work” (p. 266). Susannah likes to hire people to clean, while
Laurel believes that the family should clean their own space. The women disagree
so strongly on the topic that Susannah does not tell Laurel about the hired
cleaners. In the house with Laurel and Susannah, the children see different
approaches to meals, conversation, and housekeeping.

# Everyday Life

Although both marriages end in divorce, Laurel and Susannah make different
choices as wives. One summer, a young Jeremiah asks what a maiden name is, and
why a lady has to change her name when she marries. Laurel answers Jeremiah,
“She doesn’t. I didn’t. My name is Laurel Dunne, same as the day I was born.
Nice, huh? After all, why should a woman have to change her name for a man? She
shouldn’t” (p. 43). Laurel keeps her maiden name after she marries. She explains
to Jeremiah that women are not required to change their names after marriage.
Susannah, on the other hand, makes the more traditional choice, and changes her
last name to match her husband’s last name. She goes from Susannah Beck to
Susannah Fisher after she marries Adam Fisher. Isabel relates that when Adam
Fisher comes to the beach house, “Susannah would fix his favorite drink and have
it ready, ginger and Maker’s Mark. My mother teased her for waiting on him, but
Susannah didn’t mind” (p. 47). Isabel notices that Susannah likes to have nice
things ready for Adam when he arrives, while Laurel thinks that Susannah behaves
like a waitress when she does that. Laurel and Susannah also differ in the
emotions they reveal. Isabel says of Laurel’s divorce:  “I wasn’t sure if it was
that she fell out of love or if it was that she just never was. In love, I mean”
(pp. 50-51). Isabel isn’t sure of her mother’s feelings. However, Susannah’s
divorce completely surprises Isabel. Isabel thinks, “Whatever love was, I was
sure [Susannah and Adam] had it. I thought they had it a million times over. The
way they gazed at each other at the dinner table, how excited Susannah got when
he came to the summer house…” (p. 165). Isabel is uncertain about her mother’s
relationship, but she thinks she has a clear understanding of Susannah’s
relationship because Susannah shows more evidence of love. Isabel sees Susannah
and Adam’s shared, loving looks, and sees Susannah’s excitement about Adam.
Unlike Laurel, Susannah changes her last name, likes to perform acts of service,
and publicly displays her affection towards her husband.

# Children

As mothers, Laurel and Susannah have some different views on parenting. Isabel
shares: “After the summer was over, when I got back home, I went to the music
store and bought the sheet music and learned to play [Pearl Jam] on the
piano…Susannah tried to get [a piano] for the summer house, so I could practice,
but my mother wouldn’t let her” (p. 35). Susannah wants to buy anything she can
to support Isabel’s interests. However, Laurel thinks a piano at the beach house
is too much. Although both women want to support Isabel, Laurel thinks more
about costs and practicality. The night before they leave the beach, the two
families eat all the food in the refrigerator. Conrad complains that a rib on
his plate has mold, so Laurel tells him to give it to her. Laurel says, “I swear
you spoil these boys, Beck…Belly was raised on leftovers, weren’t you, bean?”
(p. 267). Beck answers, “I do spoil them…They’re angels. Why shouldn’t I?” (p.
268). Laurel thinks that Conrad should simply scrape the mold off the rib and
eat it anyway. She thinks that Conrad and Jeremiah are spoiled, and unaccustomed
to leftovers. Laurel claims that her own children eat leftovers all the time.
The women also differ in their affection towards the children. Isabel says:
“[Susannah] touched my hair lightly, which I loved. Susannah was much more
affectionate than my mother in those kinds of ways” (p. 56). Susannah offers the
children physical affection in a way that Laurel usually does not. Laurel and
Susannah differ in terms of what they feel happy to buy for the children, what
they expect from the children, and the way they show their affection.

Best friends Laurel Dunne and Susannah Fisher exhibit contrasting approaches to
everyday life, their marriages, and their children. In their everyday lives,
Laurel is predictable and sensible when she cooks. Susannah remains
unpredictable and takes more risks. The women prefer different topics of
conversation at the dinner table, and they feel differently about the right way
to clean a house. Regarding marriage, Laurel doesn’t believe that women should
change their last names when they marry, and she never behaves in a way that
reveals her true feelings for her husband. Susannah changes her last name to her
husband’s last name and comfortably reveals her affection for her husband in
front of others. Laurel prefers to be more selective when it comes to gifts for
the children, and stricter regarding certain expectations. In contrast, Susannah
enjoys gift-giving regardless of cost, and does not demand as much of the
children. The two women also show affection to the children in unique ways.
During the summers at the beach, Laurel and Susannah show their children how two
people can have some different opinions and make different choices and still be
great friends.

---
References

Han, J. (2009). _The Summer I Turned Pretty_. Simon & Schuster.
