---
layout: post
title:  Victor the Egoistic Monster
book_author: Mary Shelley
date:   2023-05-02 10:00:00 +0700
categories: 16-18
image: frankenstein.jpg
---

In Mary Shelley’s 1818 novel, _Frankenstein_, the narrator Victor Frankenstein
explains how he puts together human body parts, and brings to life his own man.
Victor immediately despises his creation, who ultimately does become murderous.
However, all of the wrongs that Victor’s creation does commit cannot distract
from the story’s original villain: Victor Frankenstein. Victor’s
self-centeredness allows him to think that his success is better than everyone
else’s, his sorrow is deeper than everyone else’s, and that his interpersonal
needs are more significant than anyone else’s. Victor’s inability to empathize
with anyone else, and his own self-importance slowly and effectively destroy
everyone around him. Although Victor Frankenstein creates a monster, the
ego-centric Victor is the real villain of Mary Shelley’s story.

# Glory

Victor begins his story with the claim: “I am by birth a Genevese; and my family
is one of the most distinguished of that republic” (p. 37). Victor’s very first
words in the novel convey his high opinion of himself and his lineage, as he
counts himself among Geneva’s “most distinguished.” Victor explains that only
after a very successful career, his father thinks “...of marrying, and bestowing
on the state sons who might carry his virtues and his name down to prosperity”
(p. 37). Victor portrays himself as a gift that his father bestows on society,
someone significant in the present and future. When Victor thinks about his
legacy, he explains, “Wealth was an inferior object: but what glory would attend
the discovery, if I could banish disease from the human frame, and render man
invulnerable to any but a violent death!” (p. 40). Victor ignores how his
scientific discoveries might affect the lives of others. He also does not
concern himself with wealth because he already has wealth. Instead, Victor
relishes the honor and fame he trusts his discovery will confer. He fantasizes
about “what glory would attend the discovery,”  if he discovers the secret to
immortality. When Victor accomplishes his goal, he marvels: “...among so many
men of genius, who had directed their inquiries towards the same science…I alone
should be reserved to discover so astonishing a secret” (p. 48). Victor claims
that many other genius men in the same field cannot do what he can do. He says,
“I alone should be reserved,” for the discovery of immortality as if to suggest
he is God’s choice, distinct from and above the other geniuses. Professionally,
Victor Frankenstein seeks a unique glory, so that he becomes greater than any
other genius scientist before him.

# Sorrow

Just as Victor feels superior in his glory, he feels the most extreme in his
sorrow. When people around him die, Victor does not think of the victims or of
other people that love them, he pities only himself. After the death of his
young brother William, Victor visits the scene of William’s murder. Victor
claims: “No one can conceive the anguish I suffered during the remainder of the
night, which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air” (p. 65). Victor believes
that other people cannot begin to understand his great pain. He focuses entirely
on his own suffering, his cold, wet, unsheltered night (which he chooses to
experience), instead of his dead brother William’s fate. The servant Justine
Moritz endures an accusation, a trial, a conviction, and a sentence for young
William’s murder, and all the while Victor refuses to explain that his creation
is his brother’s murderer, not Justine. Despite Justine’s terrible situation,
Victor argues that: “The tortures of the accused did not equal mine…” (p. 71),
and that: “The poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass the dreary boundary
between life and death, felt not as I did, such deep and bitter agony” (p. 73).
Victor thinks not of Justine, the young woman who faces her entire community’s
condemnation and her own execution. Despite Justine’s position, Victor maintains
that her troubles cannot equal his own. Again, Victor claims his agony to be
greatest. Following the death of his friend, Henry Clerval, Victor Frankenstein
insists that he feels, “More miserable than man ever was before…Of what
materials was I made, that I could thus resist so many shocks, which, like the
turning of the wheel, continually renewed the torture”  (p. 135). Victor feels
that he is a constant victim and that he is the most unhappy man. He also
compliments himself when he calls into question his constitution. He suggests
that he is different from other men, and able to endure an unusual amount of
challenges. Around the time of William, Justine, and Henry’s deaths, Victor
focuses only on himself and believes he feels the most sorrow.

# Relationships

Victor perceives himself as the center of the world, while people he knows are
simply there to support him. When Victor’s mother dies of scarlet fever,
Elizabeth does her best to console Victor, his younger brothers, and his father.
Victor remembers: “I never beheld [Elizabeth] so enchanting as at this time,
when she was continually endeavoring to contribute to the happiness of others,
entirely forgetful of herself” (p. 44). Victor’s fondest memory of Elizabeth is
at a time when she puts Victor and his immediate family members before herself.
Victor likes Elizabeth best when she puts Victor before herself. As he builds
his eight foot man, Victor trusts that: “A new species would bless me as its
creator and source; many happy and excellent natures would owe their being to
me. No father could claim the gratitude of his child so completely as I should
deserve their’s” (p. 49). Victor likes to think of himself as the creator (god),
source, and father of a unique type of being. He believes he deserves gratitude
from his creation more than any other father deserves gratitude from his child.
When Victor’s younger brother, William dies, Victor returns to the family home.
Victor’s brother, Ernest, greets Victor and begins to cry. Victor chides Ernest:
“Do not welcome me thus; try to be more calm, that I may not be absolutely
miserable the moment I enter my father’s house after so long absence” (p. 66).
Although Victor and Ernest are both William’s brothers, Victor prioritizes
himself over Ernest. Victor demands that Ernest change his emotional state in
consideration of Victor’s emotional state. Victor expects Elizabeth, his
creation, and his brother to prioritize him.



Victor Frankenstein thinks he comes from a distinguished family, and that his
very birth is a gift on earth. He expects fame and respect from the public for
his scientific discovery, and when he achieves his goal, he considers himself a
genius above others. His feelings are equally extreme and self-centered when he
experiences negative emotions. When Victor’s brother William dies, he believes
that he feels worst, and does not consider the anguish of William’s Father or
other siblings. When Justine faces her own execution, Victor still believes he
feels even more agony. At the death of his friend, Victor insists that his
misery is the worst of anyone’s in history. As he fluctuates between feelings of
intense grandeur and misery, he wants the people in his life always to defer to
him. Victor wants his wife, his creation, and his brother to adore him and put
him first. Victor’s consistent preoccupation with himself, not Victor’s monster,
is the true source of horror in Mary Shelley’s novel.

---
References

Shelley, M. (2018). _Frankenstein: The 1818 text_. Penguin Books. (Original work
published 1818).
