---
layout: post
title: _The Serious Lives of Children and Their Toys_
book_author: Sarah Ardizzone
date:   2023-04-01 11:11:11 +0700
categories: 16-18
image: nutcracker.jpg
---

Sarah Ardizzone’s 2015 English book, _The Story of a Nutcracker_, brings
Alexandre Dumas’s French 19th century story to life in a new age. The story
begins around Christmas time, when seven-and-a-half year old Marie Silberhaus,
her brother, nine-year-old Fritz Silberhaus, and the toys that populate their
home, embark on an adventure. Marie and Fritz try their best to aid Nutcracker,
one the newest members of their household, against Nutcracker’s enemy, the Mouse
King. In order to make the story both more dramatic and humorous, Dumas portrays
Marie, Fritz, and the toys - including Nutcracker - as dignified characters in
the story.

## Fritz

In _The Story of a Nutcracker_, nine-year-old Fritz receives the same treatment
as a true military man. When the children receive their Christmas gifts, Fritz
goes directly to his new toy horse, and, “Like a latter-day Alexander the Great,
he quickly clambered onto his glistening Bucephalus, which was saddled and
bridled, and…he declared… that although it was a wild and rebellious beast, he
was confident of taming it within a month to become as gentle as a lamb” (p.
23). The storyteller compares nine-year-old Fritz to Alexander the Great, the
renowned 4th century Macedonian King and conqueror. The storyteller equates
Fritz’s new toy with Alexander the Great’s famous horse, Bucephalus, and
highlights Fritz’s abilities to effectively train the horse. When Fritz damages
the children’s new nutcracker, but wants to continue to use the toy, the
children’s father, Judge Silberhaus, earnestly intervenes. Fritz and Marie’s
father says to his son, Fritz: “...when did you ever see a general send a
soldier injured in the course of duty back to the line of fire? The wounded go
to hospital until they are healed and, if they remain injured, they are accorded
the invalided status of a former soldier” (p. 37). Judge Silberhouse expects
Fritz to behave like a general. He expects Fritz to recognize when a soldier (in
this case, the nutcracker) needs rest from battle, and medical attention. Judge
Silberouse chides Fritz’s professional impropriety. Marie excuses her brother’s
sometimes violent behavior. She explains to Nutcracker: “It’s just that [Fritz]
can be a little rough sometimes, and his heart has hardened in his life as a
soldier” (p. 43). Marie imagines that her young brother, Fritz, after many years
as a soldier, is understandably insensitive to the suffering of others. The
storyteller, Judge Silberhouse, and Marie, liken Fritz to Alexander the Great, a
general, and a soldier, respectively.

## Marie

Marie receives the same respect that Fritz does. When Fritz injures Nutcracker,
and Nutcracker needs help, Marie fights on Nutcracker’s behalf. Marie demands to
become Nutcracker’s caregiver, and Nutcracker “...seemed to trust in the
kindness of his protectoress, and to be soothed by her as she gently cradled
him” (p. 38). The storyteller refers to Marie as a “protectoress,” who gains
Nutcracker’s trust, and manages to comfort him. Marie gently cradles Nutcracker
like an adult parent looks after a baby, or the way a professional nurse cares
for a patient. Later, Godfather Drosselmayer says to Marie: “‘...you need to
understand that it is not I, but you alone, who can save [Nutcracker]: be strong
and true, and all will be well” (p. 143). Like Judge Silberhouse, Godfather
Drosselmayer proves to be an adult that takes the children seriously. Godfather
Drosselmayer claims to Marie that only she can rescue Nutcracker. Godfather
Drosselmayer encourages Marie to be “strong and true,” and professes to have
faith in her. Following his victory over the Mouse King, Nutcracker introduces
Marie to his family. Nutcracker praises Marie, and proclaims to his siblings:
“Dear sisters, allow me to introduce you to Miss Marie Silberhaus. She is the
daughter of Judge Silberhaus of Nuremberg, a greatly respected man in the town
where he lives. It was Miss Silberhaus who saved my life” (p. 172). Nutcracker
gives young Marie the formal title, “Miss,” and uses Marie’s full name to
introduce her. He highlights Marie’s admirable lineage, and gives her full
credit for his life. The storyteller, Godfather Drosselmayer, and Nutcracker
describe Marie as a protectoress and savior.

## The Toys

The characters in Alexandre Dumas’s story treat the toys just as seriously as
they do the children, Fritz and Marie. In response to Nutcracker’s initial
injuries in the Silberhouse home, Marie tells Nutcracker that she can care for
him. Marie asks her new doll for support: “Please, Miss Clara,” Marie pleads,
“would you mind giving up your bed for my Nutcracker, who is sick, and making do
instead with the sofa for one night?” (p. 44). Marie treats Miss Clara as an
individual with the autonomy to refuse Marie’s requests. Marie_ _politely asks_,
_she does not demand, that Miss Clara give her bed to Nutcracker for one night.
Marie also kindly explains to Miss Clara that Nutcracker is unwell, which is the
reason for her request. When Nutcracker regains enough health to fight his
enemies, Marie helps him find a weapon. Marie goes to her brother, and Fritz
reacts quickly; he tells Marie: “‘...I think I’ve got what he’s looking for.
Yesterday I discharged from the Horse Guard (with a pension of course) a veteran
major who has served his time. I don't suppose he needs his sabre anymore, and
it has an excellent blade” (p. 154). Fritz’s words show his consideration for
his toy soldier as well as Nutcracker. Fritz wants his sister to know that he
pays his soldiers the money they deserve upon their retirement. He also wants to
help Nutcracker - he claims to possess “an excellent blade,” and that the sword
is the weapon Nutcracker probably wants. When battle ensues between the Mouse
King and Nutcracker’s forces, the Storyteller explains the results of the
fighting. The storyteller insists: “...the National Guard had died like the
three hundred Spartans at the Battle of Thermopylae, no retreat, no surrender”
(p. 60). The storyteller compares the “National Guard” toys to legendary ancient
Greek warriors. According to the storyteller, each member of the National Guard
dies bravely in the fight - each refuses to withdraw or forfeit to the enemy.
Ms. Clara the doll, the nutcracker, and the toy soldiers of the National Guard
all enjoy the status of respected entities.

From beginning to end, the children and toys in _The Story of a Nutcracker_,
prove to be earnest, and entertaining, participants in the drama. Marie’s
brother Fritz serves as a seasoned military commander - his skills comparable to
Alexander the Great. Fritz’s father expects a high level of professionalism from
Fritz, while Fritz’s sister excuses Fritz’s harsh behavior on account of his
many experiences as a soldier. While she boasts fewer years of military
experience than her brother, Marie’s merciful and compassionate nature allow her
to serve as Nutckracker’s ultimate champion. Marie’s Godfather tells her that
she alone can save Nutcracker, and she does. Nutcracker credits Marie solely. As
for the children’s toys, they maintain independent identities. The other
characters in the story speak to the toys and about the toys in a way that shows
respect and true care.

---
References

Dumas, A. (2015). _The story of a nutcracker_. (S. Ardizzone, Trans.). Vintage
Books. (Original work published 1845).
