---
layout: post
title: The Island of Death
book_author: Shigeru Mizuki
categories: 18+
image: onward-towards-our-noble-deaths.jpeg
---

In _Onward Towards Our Noble Deaths_ (2011), Shigeru Mizuki highlights the
hardships soldiers face besides their enemy. Mizuki’s graphic novel focuses on
Japanese soldiers on the island of New Britain in Papua New Guinea during the
Second World War. One problem the soldiers face is lack of food. Distracted by
their hunger, the men often stop in the middle of work to forage in the jungle.
As the soldiers lack proper nutrition, they become even more susceptible to
disease. In the wild, tropical environment of the island, the men suffer from
different maladies. Most terrifying of all, however, remain the expectations of
the Japanese army commanders. Rather than retreat, or resort to guerilla
tactics, Japanese leadership prefers entire battalions to concede nothing and
engage in offenses that they cannot win. Bound by a traditional sense of honor,
Japanese leadership directly precipitates the deaths of many Japanese soldiers.
Shigeru Mizuki’s _Onward Towards Our Noble Deaths_, reveals the beleaguered
lives of Japanese soldiers as they struggle to survive in a place with too
little food, dangerous sicknesses, and ruthless leadership.

# Food

Underfed by the army, the hungry Japanese soldiers stay on the lookout for food.
As one soldier carries timber through the jungle, he suggests to his partner,
“Wanna take a break? I can’t do anything on just one cup of rice a day. Wonder
if we can eat that fruit over there. Nope too bitter” (pp. 42-43). The hungry
soldier’s energy wanes, and he must stop to rest in the middle of the jungle. He
complains that he cannot efficiently complete his tasks with so little food each
day. Desperate, the soldier takes a risk, and tries a jungle fruit he does not
know. Later, Private Second Class Maruyama makes a similar complaint. Maruyama
says to his fellow soldier, “I’m so hungry, I can’t think” (p. 55). When the
fellow soldier shows Maruyama a secret stash of potatoes, Maruyama exclaims:
“Potatoes! Wow! With this many potatoes, I can now die a happy man!” (p. 56).
Maruyama claims his hunger impedes his normal thinking skills. When he finds
potatoes, he exaggerates happily. He claims that the potatoes fulfill him
completely. Another time in the jungle, the soldiers find an abandoned
structure, full of enemy rations. The hungry soldiers fight each other over the
canned food and chocolate. One soldier hits another soldier and says to him,
“Rookie like you…you don’t get treats like this…I found the chocolate first.
Open your mouth, rookie, and I’ll send you flying” (p. 104). The soldiers’
general lack of food makes them selfish when they do discover food. The food
they discover in the enemy structure causes them to turn on each other, to
become violent and derogatory towards each other. As they do not receive enough
food from their army, food becomes the soldiers’ highest priority. The hungry
soldiers must supplement their diets themselves, with food they find on the
island. The soldiers’ hunger negatively affects them throughout their days.

# Sickness

In the jungle of New Britain, the Japanese soldiers become vulnerable to
diseases. Malaria creates the most trouble for the soldiers. One corpsman
reports to a doctor: “With this southern location, more men are coming down with
fevers. Two men can’t even move anymore” (p. 107). The corpsman expresses the
soldiers’ problematic position, and the growing number of sick soldiers. He
reports that two soldiers are immobile due to malaria. Later, one soldier
observes: “We have this many casualties and malaria victims? It's out of
control” (p. 193). The soldier sees that the number of soldiers sick with
malaria seriously hinders the Japanese effectiveness in Papua New Guinea. The
soldier feels surprised and overwhelmed by the losses. In the jungle one day,
Private First Class Ogawa collapses and must visit the doctor. The doctor tells
Ogawa, “Your arm’s broken, but more than that…You’ve got dengue fever” (p. 41).
Ogawa collapses and suffers a broken arm. However, Ogawa’s underlying sickness
outweighs the broken arm. Soon after he goes to the hospital, Ogawa dies (p.
45). In another scene in the jungle, Corporal Yokoi warns Maruyama, “Hey! You
can’t drink that water…What’re you gonna do if you get amoebic dysentery!” (p.
331). In a moment of weakness, Maruyama wants to drink the standing water in the
jungle. Maruyama’s intense thirst and feeling of impending doom make him
indifferent to the possibility of dysentery. Yokoi reminds Maruyama that he must
resist the standing water, as a hungry man in the jungle with dysentery has few
good options. Malaria, dengue, and dysentery threaten the Japanese soldiers in
Papua New Guinea.

# Leadership

Along with hunger and sickness, the soldiers face the mental anguish of
faltering faith in their own army. When the Japanese soldiers in Papua New
Guinea hear about the bombings in Japan, they question their purpose in Papua
New Guinea: “If everything at home is crazy like that - what’re we doing
fighting a war here?” (p. 217). With the new knowledge that their homeland is in
danger, the men feel a motivation to leave Papua New Guinea and return home to
Japan. The soldiers want to defend their homes in Japan more than they want to
hold ground on foreign islands. However, the soldiers’ commanders not only want
the soldiers to remain in Papua New Guinea, they expect the soldiers to fight
until their deaths there. The commanding officers order a suicide charge - a
noble death. A doctor in the second platoon voices his abhorrence of the
traditional practice. The doctor exclaims: “Regardless, it is the will of the
universe for all living things to live. It’s wrong to get in the way of
that…This ‘army’ is the most diseased thing humanity has ever seen. This is not
the way human beings should be” (p. 280). The doctor believes that the purpose
of life is to live. He insists that the army is sick to order its soldiers into
suicide charges because a suicide charge goes against nature. The doctor shares
his opinion with a commanding officer, who tells the doctor he is shameful. Much
to the dismay of the commanders, some men survive the mission. As officers,
Lieutenants Yamagishi and Kitzaki receive a higher blame than the enlisted men.
The two officers agree to commit suicide in order to atone for their actions.
However, Kitzaki wonders: “What the hell was that suicide charge for…what are we
killing ourselves for?” (p. 321). Kitzaki questions the decisions of army
leadership, and questions his own role in the army’s practices. Throughout the
story, several individuals lament the choices their army makes for them.

_Onward Towards Our Noble Deaths_ illustrates the hardships of one Japanese
battalion on the island of New Britain, in Papua New Guinea. Graphic novelist
Shigeru Mizuki largely avoids the international politics and context of the
Second World War. Instead, Mizuki delivers a closer, more introspective
examination of the real life of a Japanese soldier at the time. Mizuki details
the constant battle the soldiers face with hunger. He describes many
conversations that the soldiers have about food, including unfamiliar island
plants, potatoes, and chocolate. Mizuki also portrays how the Japanese soldiers
in New Britain struggle against disease. Various ailments such as malaria,
dengue, and dysentery have the power to immobilize the soldiers. The Japanese
presence on the island weakens because of the number of sick soldiers. Finally,
Japanese leadership proves to be demoralizing and even murderous for Japanese
soldiers. Shigeru Mizuki reveals conditions on the island of New Britain that
show how for Japanese soldiers, the enemy is only one of their many problems.

---
References

Mizuki, S. (2011). _Onward towards our noble deaths_ (J. Allen, Trans.). Drawn &
Quarterly. (Original work published 1973)
