---
layout: post
title: What Good Friends Do
book_author: Jerry Craft
categories: 10-12
image: new_kid.jpg
---

Jerry Craft’s graphic novel, _New Kid_ (2019), tells the story of
twelve-year-old Jordan Banks’s first year at a new school. Jordan becomes
especially good friends with Liam Landers and another new student, Drew Ellis.
The three boys like to play sports and video games, and they like to joke and
have fun together. However, the boys also experience more challenging times.
Sometimes, the friends behave in ways they aren’t proud of, say things they
realize are hurtful, or _don’t_ do or say anything when they should. After
instances where the boys regret their actions, words, or their lack of action
and words, they readily apologize to each other. When the boys apologize, they
show strong communication and compassion. Jordan, Liam, and Drew also experience
a few negative interactions with other people. The boys come to one another’s
defense in challenging situations with girls, other boys, and even teachers.
When they speak up for each other, they show each other meaningful support.
Jordan, Liam, and Drew also help each other throughout the story. They offer
help regarding unfamiliar situations, and hard situations. The boys are able to
make and keep good friendships because they not only bond over similar interests
and fun times, but also because they make good choices when times are less fun.

# Apologize

When the boys feel badly about their words or actions, they apologize to each
other. On the first day of school, Liam’s father drives Liam and Jordan to
school in his car. Jordan gets in the car and tries to introduce himself to
Liam, but Liam sleeps the whole ride to school. Later that day, Liam says to
Jordan, “By the way, sorry about this morning…Guess I’m not a morning person.
Plus some family drama” (p. 46). Liam’s simple apology shows Jordan that Liam
does not intend to avoid him. The apology also gives Jordan a little
understanding of Liam’s challenges with his family. Another time, Jordan takes
the bus to school, and a driver brings Liam to school. When the boys meet in
front of the school, Jordan says to Liam, “Hey, Mr.
‘I-dive-to-school-in-a-fancy-car-while-other-people-have-to-take-the-stinky-bus”
(p. 58). Liam tells Jordan the car isn’t that fancy and Jordan senses that Liam
isn’t amused. Jordan says, “Sorry, dude, I was only joking” (p. 58). Moments
like this make Jordan realize that Liam’s family wealth makes Liam feel
genuinely uncomfortable, so Jordan doesn’t want to tease him about money. When
Jordan realizes Liam’s discomfort, he immediately apologizes and let’s Liam know
he doesn’t mean to criticize him. During school one day, Ms. Rawle overhears and
misunderstands a friendly exchange between Drew and Jordan. Ms. Rawle offends
and embarrasses Drew when she confronts him. Jordan remains silent while he
watches Ms. Rawle scold Drew, but later that evening, Jordan tells Drew, “Sorry
I didn’t defend you, but I was in shock” (p. 91). Jordan feels badly about his
silence during Ms. Rawle’s reprimand. Jordan apologizes to Drew for his silence
and explains his shock in the moment. When the boys offer sincere apologies,
especially apologies and explanations, they show compassion for each other, and
strengthen their communication.

# Defend

The boys also defend each other from other people. One day, Liam introduces
Jordan to their classmates, Ashley Martin and Ruby Wu. The girls start to ask
Jordan questions, and one of the questions they ask him is if he lives only with
his mom. The girls highlight the stereotype that black children often live in
homes without their fathers. After the girls ask the question, Jordan’s brow
furrows, and his lips tighten. Liam leans over to put himself between Jordan and
the girls. Liam extends an open palm to the girls’ faces and says, “and his dad!
And he’s trying to eat lunch. You have all year to get all up in his business”
(p. 67). Liam recognizes that Jordan doesn’t appreciate the girls’ question.
Liam comes to Jordan’s defense and immediately dispels any misconceptions. He
also insists that Jordan is busy with his lunch, and that the girls can ask
Jordan questions later, which helps Jordan avoid any further conversation with
the girls at that moment. Later in the year, Andy (another one of the boys’
classmates), calls for everyone’s attention at school, and jokes that Jordan
looks like a lost child. Drew comes to Jordan’s defense. Drew walks towards
Andy, points a finger at him, and says, “Not funny, Andy!” Drew’s words
communicate clearly that Andy isn’t funny when he teases Jordan. The times that
Liam and Drew come to Jordan’s defense seem to empower Jordan to come to his
friends’ defense when they need him in return. During one incident in the
cafeteria, Andy pushes Drew, and Drew pushes Andy back. Andy slips on an apple
and Ms. Rawle only happens to see Andy on the ground. She assumes Andy is the
victim and Drew is the perpetrator. As a witness, Jordan knows the situation is
more complicated, and feels confident to tell the truth. Jordan adamantly
defends Drew, and tells Ms. Rawle, “Wait!!! Ms. Rawle, Drew did not knock Andy
down. Andy pushed him first. Then when Drew pushed him back, Andy slipped on an
apple! C’mon, who else saw it?” (p. 206). Jordan stops Ms. Rawle, and clearly
explains the truth. He then calls for more witnesses in Drew’s defense. Jordan’s
account inspires other students to tell the truth and eventually convinces all
the teachers that Drew _and_ Andy (not only Drew) are responsible for poor
choices. Liam, Drew, and Jordan all defend their friends against other students
and even teachers in difficult moments.

# Help

Finally, they boys offer each other help. On Jordan’s first day at his new
school, Liam offers to help Jordan find his way to classes. Liam says to Jordan,
“Need me to show you how to get there?” (p. 34). Initially, Jordan refuses, and
tries to rely on his map alone. The campus is more complicated than Jordan
expects, however, and for a while he struggles to find his way. Liam sees Jordan
struggle, and begins to insist: “C’mon, let’s get you to class. There’s no
telling where you’ll end up this time” (p. 62). As Liam knows the school better
than Jordan, Liam knows he can help Jordan. Liam offers the same assistance more
than just once, and he is sincere every time. Liam becomes more insistent when
he realizes Jordan doesn’t want to be a bother, but really does need help. That
Fall, both Liam and Jordan play soccer. In the locker room before Jordan’s first
game, Jordan tells Liam that this is his first soccer team, and that he still
isn’t sure of all the rules. Liam says to Jordan, “Aww, you should have told me,
I would have helped you” (p. 72). Again, Liam lets Jordan know that he is happy
to help Jordan. Liam’s words assure Jordan that if ever finds himself in a
similar situation in the future, Jordan just needs to tell Liam.  When Drew and
Andy have their altercation in the cafeteria, a lunch tray with food falls to
the ground. At first only Drew and Andy begin to clean. Soon however, Liam and
Jordan join Drew. In a wordless scene, Drew does not ask his friends for help,
and Liam and Jordan do not ask Drew if he needs help. Liam and Jordan simply
recognize that they can help Drew and immediately act. Liam and Jordan smile as
they clean the floor alongside Drew (p. 209). The boys illustrate that a good
time to help is when one person knows more about a situation than their friend,
and when a friend can make an unpleasant task go by quicker.

Jordan, Liam, and Drew become friends because they share similar interests and
understand one another. They also become friends because they treat each other
well in serious situations. Firstly, the boys clearly apologize to each other.
Liam apologizes to Jordan when he regrets his behavior, Jordan apologizes to
Liam when he realizes Liam really does not like jokes about a particular topic,
and Jordan apologizes to Drew after Jordan fails to speak up for Drew. Secondly,
the boys do their best to defend each other. Liam defends Jordan against Ashley
and Ruby, Drew defends Jordan against Andy’s bullying, and Jordan defends Drew
against Ms. Rawle (the second time around). Lastly, Jordan, Liam, and Drew help
each other. Liam helps Jordan find his way when Jordan first comes to Riverdale.
Liam also offers to teach Jordan new skills. Liam and Jordan help Drew clean the
cafeteria floor when a lunch tray spills. The boys show how powerful friends can
be in tough moments. As important as it is to have good times with friends,
Jordan, Liam, and Drew illustrate the importance of being a good friend during
the harder times as well.

---
References

Craft, J. (2019). _New Kid_. Quill Tree Books.
