---
layout: post
title: Holden's Search for Connection
book_author: J.D. Salinger
categories: 16-18
image: catcher-in-the-rye.webp
---

As Holden Caulfield faces his dismissal from yet another school, he battles
intense feelings of isolation and loss. To fight the loneliness he experiences,
Holden reaches for anyone and everyone he can. Holden turns to people he can
access, not necessarily people he likes. He turns to these people because of
proximity, shared history, and even just one redeeming quality. Holden behaves
as though anyone he knows may suffice in his time of need. Besides the people he
knows, Holden also attempts to engage people he doesn’t know. He seems equally
indiscriminate with strangers. Upon his departure from the school, Pencey Prep,
Holden initiates conversation with all manner of strangers: adult men at work,
women at restaurants, and children at play. With all of the strangers, Holden
tries to attract their attention and favor with drinks, donations, or hot
chocolate. Holden simply wants them to stay with him. As Holden continues to
initiate conversations with people, no patterns emerge in terms of the type of
person Holden approaches. He remains open to all who listen to him. Finally,
Holden takes risks with some of the women he engages. Sixteen-year-old Holden
flirts with a former schoolmate’s mother, hires a sex worker, and makes drunken
advances towards a woman at her workplace. Holden’s extreme loneliness leads him
to seek out people he does not like, people he does not know, and women with
whom he should not flirt. In his desperation, Holden turns mostly to people who
can not satisfy his need for human connection.

# People he does not like

Holden feels so desperate for connection that he reaches out to people he does
not like. Holden feels annoyed and even disgusted by Robert Ackley, a fellow
Pencey Prep student. However, Holden confesses: “[Ackley] was sort of a nasty
guy. I wasn’t too crazy about [Ackley], to tell you the truth…I asked Mal if he
minded if Ackley came along with us. The reason I asked was because Ackley never
did anything on Saturday night…” (p. 10, 18). Holden describes Ackley as “nasty”
and admits that he does not care for Ackley. Despite Holden’s negative opinion
of Ackley, he chooses to invite Ackley along with him and another boy on their
weekend outing. As Ackley sleeps in the room next to Holden’s, Holden sees
Ackley’s own isolation and can empathize. When Holden leaves Pencey Prep for
Manhattan, he telephones a girl he sometimes dates, Sally Hayes. Holden shares,
“I wasn’t too crazy about [Sally], but I’d known her for years. I used to think
she was quite intelligent, in my stupidity…Anyway, I gave her a buzz” (p. 55).
Holden no longer likes Sally, and does not think she is very smart. Holden calls
to invite her on a date anyway because he has a history of dating with her. He
knows if he talks to Sally, he has a chance to get a date. Later, Holden
telephones Carl Luce, a former schoolmate. Holden explains, “I gave old Carl
Luce a buzz. He graduated from the Whooton School after I left. He was about
three years older than I was, and I didn’t like him too much, but he was one of
these very intellectual guys” (p. 69). Carl Luce is another person Holden
believes may meet him. As with Ackley and Sally, Holden shares that he does not
like Carl. Holden hopes he and Carl can at least have an interesting
conversation. Holden explicitly says that he does not like Robert Ackley, Sally
Hayes, or Carl Luce, however, he invites them all to spend time with him. In his
desire for human interaction, Holden indiscriminately contacts the people he
knows.

# People he does not know

Holden also tries to make connections with new people he encounters in fleeting
situations. When Holden gets off the train at Penn Station, he attempts to
befriend the first person he interacts with: a taxi driver. Holden asks the taxi
driver to take him to a hotel, and on the way, Holden asks the driver: “Would
you care to stop on the way and join me for a cocktail? On me. I’m loaded” (p.
31). Although he never seems to learn his driver’s name, Holden politely invites
the man to spend time with him. Holden asks the man to stop work to go to a bar
with him. Holden says, “somewhere,” as if he remains flexible and open to
suggestions, and makes clear to the driver that he intends to pay for the
driver’s drinks. Holden assures the taxi driver that he has enough money for the
two of them. The next day at breakfast, Holden seeks interaction with more
strangers. Two nuns sit down beside him at a breakfast counter and “They didn’t
seem to know what the hell to do with their suitcases, so I gave them a
hand…They let me give them ten bucks as a contribution…I swung the conversation
around to general topics and asked them where they were going” (p. 56-57).
Holden immediately helps the nuns with their belongings and offers them a
monetary donation. Although only a teenager, without a job of his own, Holden
insists that the nuns take cash from him. He proceeds to tell the nuns about
himself, and also asks them questions. While he isn’t Catholic, Holden takes a
great interest in the two nuns. After breakfast, Holden goes on a walk and
encounters a child in the park. He asks the child if she knows his sister, and
helps the child with her skates. He muses, “She was a very nice, polite little
kid. God, I love it when a kid’s nice and polite when you tighten their skate
for them or something. Most kids are. They really are. I asked her if she’d care
to have a hot chocolate or something with me, but she said no, thank you.” (p.
61). Sixteen-year-old Holden doesn’t mind if his companion is a little girl, he
simply wants to spend time with someone. He appreciates the girl’s good manners
and attempts to extend their interaction. Holden wants to talk to someone -
anyone - so he reaches out to strangers, including adult men, Catholic nuns, and
children.

# People with whom he takes risks

Holden asks people he dislikes to spend time with him, he engages strangers he
meets in Manhattan, and he initiates risky situations on several occasions, all
in an effort for some company. Holden seems not to care if his words and actions
are illegal, inappropriate, or dangerous. When he leaves his school, teenage
Holden meets Mrs. Morrow, a woman he learns is the mother of a former
schoolmate. Holden guesses the woman is in her forties. They strike up a normal
conversation, but Holden presses for more. Holden says to the woman: “Would you
care for a cocktail? We can go in the club car. All right?...C’mon, join me, why
don’t you?” (p. 30). At sixteen, Holden cannot legally buy alcohol for himself.
Not only does he seem willing to break the law in front of Mrs. Morrow, he
invites her to join him. In Holden’s desire to connect with someone, he extends
a flirtatious invitation to the much older, married mother of a boy he knows.
When Holden returns to his Manhattan hotel that night, he meets a man named
Maurice who offers to send a sex worker to Holden’s hotel room. Holden agrees to
Maurice’s offer but immediately laments: “That's the whole trouble. When you're
feeling depressed, you can’t even think…I was already sort of sorry I’d let the
thing start rolling, but it was too late now” (p. 48). Although he is a high
school student on his own, Hoden takes a risk and allows a strange man, late at
night, to send a woman to his room for sex. He regrets his decision to accept
Maurice’s offer, but does not change the decision. The next night, at the Wicker
Bar, Holden becomes very drunk, and directs his attention at a female employee.
He remembers: “She kept telling me to go home and go to bed. I sort of tried to
make a date with her for when she got through working, but she wouldn’t” (p.
77). Holden’s drunkenness, at a city bar by himself late at night, puts him in a
vulnerable and dangerous position. Furthermore, the woman he asks to meet him
later tells him multiple times to go home.

When Holden leaves his boarding school, he does not want to return home to his
family immediately. He wants to put off what he knows will be an unpleasant
reaction from his parents. The time between Holden’s expulsion from boarding
school and his return home to his family casts him into a lonely space. He seeks
human connection anywhere he can, and the desperation leads him to numerous
unsatisfactory and even dangerous encounters. The people that Holden knows
around him, the strangers in Manhattan, and the women towards which he makes
unwise advances, do not make him happy. During or after most of his time with
Ackley, Sally, and Carl, or his taxi cab drivers, the nuns, and the child, or
with Mrs. Morrow, the sex worker, and the employee at the Wicker Bar, Holden
feels dejected or depressed. These people do not ease his suffering. Holden’s
final moments at Pencey Prep, and his return to Manhattan illustrates the
vulnerability of a young person, especially during a challenging time. During
his last moments at Pencey Prep, and his first days back in Manhattan, the only
times Holden feels happy is when he thinks of his little sister, Phoebe, or
spends time with her. Holden feels happy when he buys Phoebe a new record (p.
60), and as he watches her ride a carousel (p. 108). After many bad
interactions, Holden can survive on the good times with his sister.

---
References

Salinger, J.D. (1951). *The catcher in the rye*. Little, Brown and Company.
