---
layout: post
title: Pumpkin Heads
book_author: Rainbow Rowell
categories: 16-18
image: pumpkin-heads.jpg
---

Deja’s Use of Language

In the 2019 graphic novel, _Pumpkin Heads_, writer Rainbow Rowell and
illustrator Faith Erin Hicks create the most loving character in Deja. _Pumpkin
Heads_ takes place on Halloween - the last night that Deja and her friend,
Josiah, work at a seasonal pumpkin patch. As they are now seniors in high
school, this might be Deja and Josiah’s last season at the patch. On their last
night, Josiah laments the end of their time at the patch, and also thinks about
Marcy, another employee at the pumpkin patch he likes, but with whom he has yet
to speak. Throughout the night, Deja tries to be a good friend to Josiah. Deja
endeavors to alleviate Josiah’s stress about their final night at the patch, and
to facilitate a conversation between Josiah and his longtime crush, Marcy. Deja
speaks kindly to Josiah and about Josiah. Deja uses her words to show how much
she cares for Josiah.

Deja consistently encourages Josiah. At the beginning of their last night at the
pumpkin patch, Josiah feels like he may never return to the patch. Deja tries to
comfort him, and says: “We’re going to college Josie, not Mars. You’ll be
back…You can come home for the weekend - the patch will still be here” (p. 5-6).
Josie feels dejected because he and Deja are high school seniors, and they will
be away from the patch and at college next year. Deja tries to reassure Josie
that college is not as far and different as he fears. Deja tells Josie that he
_will_ be back to the pumpkin patch. She tells him that although he may not work
at the patch next year, he can visit, and the patch will be the same as he knows
it. Deja empowers Josiah again when she tells him: “It’s not fate that brings
people together. It’s people! [An external factor] doesn’t get to decide whether
you and Fudge Judy are meant to be. Or whether you talk to her. You do” (p.
153). Deja stresses to Josiah that he has control over his life. Deja reminds
Josiah that he has choices, and power. Because Josiah often talks about Marcy
(Fudge Judy), Deja encourages Josiah to be bold and introduce himself. Towards
the end of the evening, Deja says to Josiah, “So, I was just talking to Marta
who runs the Cookie Burrow…she told me she’s got an in at the department store
downtown - she might be able to get us temp jobs next month as Santa’s elves”
(p. 208). Deja knows that Josiah feels sad about the end of Halloween season at
the pumpkin patch. She tries to find ways to make him happy, and offers a
reasonable solution. Deja suggests to Josiah that they work another fun holiday
job around Christmas time. Throughout the evening, Deja offers Josiah words of
encouragement that help him feel reassured, powerful, and hopeful.

Over the course of their last night at the pumpkin patch, Deja also gives Josie
several heartfelt compliments. At Josiah’s request, Deja helps Josiah practice
what to say to Marcy. As she pretends to be Josiah in a conversation with Marcy,
Deja says: “I’m a really nice guy…” (p. 20). Deja communicates to Josiah that
she thinks he is very kind and worthy of Marcy’s time. However, Josie continues
to worry that Marcy will laugh at him if he talks to her. Deja tells Josie:
“Girls actually like it when cute guys ask them out” (p. 51). Deja’s comment
lets Josiah know that Deja thinks he is attractive. Deja’s comment also
reinforces her confidence that Marcy will like Josie’s attention. When Josie and
Deja sit down at the S’mores pit, Josiah remembers their first meeting, years
ago, at the pumpkin patch’s new employee orientation. Josie feels embarrassed
when he remembers his former fascination with magic tricks. Deja says, though,
“I thought it was cool! Well…I thought it was funny…I didn’t feel sorry for you,
Josie, I’m not that nice” (p. 63). Deja claims to appreciate Josie’s magic
tricks, or magic “phase.” She describes Josiah’s magic as cool and funny. Deja
insists that she does not have the same view of Josiah as he does of himself, or
as he thinks Deja has of him. When Deja talks to Josiah, she uses positive
adjectives such as nice, cute, cool, and funny to describe him.

In addition to encouragement and commendation, Deja gives Josiah a clear
understanding of how much she values her time with him. On their mission to find
Marcy, Josiah and Deja encounter Jess, Deja’s former boyfriend. Jess mentions
that some of the pumpkin patch employees plan to go to Jenny’s house after work
that night. Jess invites Deja along, but Deja tells Jess: “Thanks. I mean,
maybe. Josie and I usually go to Walgreens on Halloween after work” (p. 89).
Deja says that she shares a tradition with Josie. She explains that she cannot
say yes to other plans because she prioritizes Josie, and plans see what Josie
wants to do first. Later, Deja tells Josie, “In the three seasons I’ve worked at
this pumpkin patch, I’ve always asked to work with you…it was a choice” (p. 92).
Deja communicates to Josie that she always wants to work with him more than
anyone else. She tells Josie that she _chooses_ him every year. Towards the end
of the night, Deja broaches a new topic of conversation with Josiah. Deja asks
him, “Josie, do you think we’re going to hang out after this?...We never have
before. We never even talk off-season…But we could be outside-of-the-patch
friends, too. We could be friends for all seasons” (p. 149). Deja and Josiah’s
friendship exists during pumpkin patch season, but Deja suggests that they spend
time together all year round, not just when they work together at the pumpkin
patch. Deja bravely articulates a desire to spend even more time with Josiah. To
other people and to Josiah, Deja verbalizes how valuable she finds the time that
she spends with Josiah.

_Pumpkin Heads_ follows the two friends Deja and Josiah on just one Halloween
night. In just a short amount of time, however, Deja’s words show the tremendous
amount of care she has for Josiah. On several occasions, Deja recognizes that
Josiah needs some encouragement and she tries to make him feel better. Deja’s
words show that she cares about how Josiah feels, and wants him to feel good.
Deja also offers Josiah her opinion of him through casual remarks that express
her admiration of him. Deja’s words let Josiah know how well she thinks of him.
Finally, Deja tells Josiah that she likes to spend time with him. By the end of
the novel, Deja’s affection for Josiah is clear not only because of her actions,
but because of her clear verbal communication with her friend. Rainbow Rowell’s
female lead illustrates the powerful effect people have when their words reflect
their feelings.

---
References

Rowell, Rainbow & Hicks, Faith Erin. (2019). _Pumpkin Heads_. Macmillan
Children’s Books.
