---
layout: post
title: The Necessary Mrs. Weasley
book_author: J.K. Rowling
categories: 13-15
image: harry-potter-4.jpg
---

J.K. Rowling’s _Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire_ (2000) highlights the
importance of mothers. Harry Potter’s fourth year at Hogwarts begins and ends
with the comforting presence of his friend Ron’s mother, Mrs. Weasley. While
Harry craves dependable adults in his life, they are painfully absent. Harry’s
own parents are dead, and the aunt and uncle that he lives with consistently
show him that they despise him. Harry’s beloved godfather, while he has Harry’s
best interest at heart, remains in hiding and largely unavailable. With such a
void of trusted adults in his life, Mrs. Weasley’s existence becomes even more
important. She serves as the one person who supports Harry in the many ways
children support. Over the summer and for school holidays, Mrs. Weasley sends
Harry packages to make him feel loved and included. In this way, Mrs. Weasley
treats Harry as her own son. Mrs. Weasley also sends letters, cooks, and runs
errands for Harry. She also goes out of her way to be present for Harry at
important moments. As Harry’s fourth year at Hogwarts illustrates, Molly Weasley
manifests the closest thing Harry has to a parent.

# Gifts

Throughout the year, Mrs. Weasley sends Harry homemade gifts. At home with Uncle
Vernon and Aunt Petunia over the summer, Harry does not care for the diet that
Aunt Petunia enforces upon the family. Harry sends a request for snacks to Ron’s
house, and “Mrs. Weasley…had sent the family owl, Errol, with an enormous
fruitcake and assorted meat pies” (p. 11). When she learns what Harry wants,
Mrs. Weasley acts immediately. Mrs. Weasley takes responsibility of the request,
and sends Harry a large amount of hearty sweet and savory food. That winter,
Mrs. Weasley sends Harry Christmas gifts. On Christmas morning, Harry sees:
“There was also, of course, Mrs. Weasley’s usual package, including a new
sweater (green, with a picture of a dragon on it - Harry supposed Charlie had
told her all about the Horntail), and a large quantity of homemade mince pies”
(p. 165). As Mrs. Weasley always sends Harry a Christmas sweater, he comes to
expect the gift from her. Mrs. Weasley makes the sweater herself, and she makes
the same gift for her own sons. This year, Mrs. Weasley customizes Harry’s
sweater - she sews a dragon on Harry’s sweater to commemorate an important
victory in Harry’s life. She also takes the time to send Harry some more
homemade food. In the Spring, Harry receives “...a package of Easter eggs that
Mrs. Weasley had sent. Both Harry’s and Ron’s were the size of dragon eggs and
full of homemade toffee” (p. 221). Again, Mrs. Weasley makes sure Harry has an
edible treat for the holiday. The gift she sends for Harry is the same as the
one she sends for her own son, Ron. While with the Dursleys or at Hogwarts,
Harry can consistently rely on special homemade deliveries from Mrs. Weasley.

# Acts of Service

Besides gifts, Mrs. Weasley also organizes trips, experiences, and errands for
Harry. Over the summer before school starts, Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia
receive a letter from Mrs. Weasley. Mrs. Weasley introduces herself to the
Durselys and asks if Harry can accompany the Weasleys to a Quidditch match. Mrs.
Weasley writes to the Dursleys: “I do hope you will allow us to take Harry to
the match, as this really is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity…We would of course
be glad to have Harry stay for the remainder of the summer holidays, and to see
him safely onto the train back to school” (p. 12). Mrs. Weasley takes the time
to write and send a letter in an unfamiliar way - the muggle way - to advocate
for Harry. She not only invites Harry to a special Quidditch match, but tells
the Dursleys she can also care for him and send him to school when the time
comes. At her house, Mrs. Dursley prepares a memorable meal for Harry. The night
Harry arrives, “By seven o’clock, the two tables were groaning under dishes and
dishes of Mrs. Weasley’s excellent cooking, and the nine Weasleys, Harry, and
Hermione were settling themselves down to eat beneath a clear, deep blue
sky…this was paradise, and at first, Harry listened rather than talked as he
helped himself to chicken and ham pie, boiled potatoes, and salad” (p. 24). The
atmosphere and the food that Mrs. Weasley creates for her entire family, and
Hermione and Harry, truly moves Harry. As he recognizes the special moment,
Harry seems to pause to really take in the present. He quietly appreciates the
environment, the company, and the specific food on the table. Before Harry and
the others leave for the quidditch match, Mrs. Weasley says, “Harry, if you
leave your school list out, I’ll get your things tomorrow in Diagon Alley. I’m
getting everyone else’s. There might not be time after the World Cup, the match
went on for five days last time” (p. 26). While the rest of the Weasley family,
Hermione and Harry leave to attend a quidditch match, Mrs. Weasley stays behind
to run errands. She treats Harry as one of her own children, and thinks ahead
for him. While Harry has fun at a sporting event with the others, Mrs. Weasley
secures for Harry his school supplies. Mrs. Weasley plans Harry’s visit to her
house, arranges special meals for him, and ensures that Harry is ready for the
new school year.

# Care

Mrs. Wealsey gives Harry gifts, works on his half, and also is simply a caring
presence for him. Towards the end of Harry’s fourth year at Hogwarts, Mrs.
Weasley comes to the school. When Harry sees Mrs. Weasley, she says to him:
“Surprise! Thought we’d come and watch you, Harry!” (p. 249). Mrs. Weasley comes
to the school to surprise Harry and support him in the tournament in which he
must compete. While the other competitors enjoy their families, Harry happily
welcomes Mrs. Weasley and her oldest son, Bill, to spend time with him and cheer
for him. Harry becomes especially grateful for Mrs. Weasley’s presence when the
tournament ends in disaster. After the devastating events of the tournament,
Mrs. Weasley comforts Harry. Mrs. Weasley “...put her arms around Harry. He had
no memory of ever being hugged like this, as though by a mother” (p. 288). Mrs.
Weasley offers Harry motherly, physical comfort. Harry realizes that this sort
of support is foreign to him. Mrs. Weasley’s heartfelt hug brings Harry out of
his daze and back to reality. At the end of the school year, Harry says goodbye
to his friends at the train station, before he rejoins the Dursleys for the
summer. As Harry says goodbye, “Mrs. Weasley was close by him. She hugged Harry
very tightly when she saw him and whispered in his ear, ‘I think Dumbledore will
let you come to us later in the summer. Keep in touch, Harry.’” (p. 296). Mrs.
Weasley is the last adult from the wizarding world that interacts with Harry
before he returns to the Dursleys at the end of the school year. Again, her
physical presence supports harry. Mrs. Weasley gives Harry some hope before he
returns to the Dursleys when she tells him she trusts that he can come back to
the Weasley household soon. Finally, Mrs. Weasley tells Harry that she wants to
hear from him over the summer. She leaves Harry with the knowledge that an adult
outside the Dursley home cares for him.

Around the time of fourteen-year-old Harry’s fourth year at Hogwarts, Harry
needs more support than ever. Harry remains an orphan under the guardianship of
his terrible aunt and uncle and over the summer holidays, he endures almost
complete isolation from the wizarding world. He has only a few opportunities to
interact with his godfather. In his fourth year at Hogwarts, a new challenge
emerges. Decision makers force Harry to compete in the Triwizard tournament, a
dangerous competition in which he must compete against older students. Harry’s
place in the competition garners him even more unwanted attention than usual.
Lies and criticisms about him spread throughout the wizarding community. Even
Harry’s best friend, Ron, comes to mistrust him for a period of time.
Thankfully, Ron Weasley’s mother, Molly Weasley, has enough compassion to care
not only for her own seven children, but for her children’s friends as well. At
a time when Harry is in desperate need of a parent, Molly Weasley steps in to
fill the role.

---
References

Rowling, J.K., (2000), _Harry Potter and the goblet of fire_. Pottermore
Limited.
