---
layout: post
title: A Portrait of Internalized Racism 
book_author: Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie
categories: 18+
image: americanah.jpg
---

Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s work, *Americanah*, illustrates how the far reaching
power of Britain and the United States affect Nigerian people in Nigeria. The
novel follows the lives of two Nigerian children, Ifemelu and Obinze, during
their childhoods in Nigeria, Ifemelu’s years in the United States, Obinze’s time
in the United Kingdom, and their ultimate return to Nigeria. During their time
in Nigeria and abroad, and through their interactions with people of different
races and nationalities, Ifemelu and Obinze come to realize the powerful effect
that predominantly white culture outside of Nigeria has on black Nigerians in
Nigeria. As adults, the two become aware of a certain way of thinking in
Nigeria, one to which many Nigerians adhere, that places Europe and the United
States above Nigeria. This way of thinking values white physical
characteristics, language, and elements of general culture. The same way of
thinking undermines black physical characteristics, Nigerian English, and
Nigerian society. *Americanah* illustrates how preferences that reflect white
supremacy manifest in the predominantly black African country of Nigeria.

# Appearance

In the novel, Ifemelu and Obinze often see Nigerian people express a bias in
favor of typically white physical features. When Ifemelu and her friend Ginika
meet again after several years apart, Ginika remembers a time from their school
days together in Nigeria. Ginika says to Ifemelu “...I was voted prettiest girl
in school back home. Remember? I should never have won. Zainab should have won.
It was just because I was a half-caste” (p. 151). The students at Ifemelu and
Ginikia’s school in Nigeria proclaim Ginika the most attractive. Ifemelu’s
classmates consider Ginika the obvious choice because she is “half-caste,” or
mixed-race - she has a black father and a white mother. Ifemelu relates how she
and her family members try to emulate white features. As a girl, Ifemelu
develops “...a keloid scar behind her ear, a small enraged swelling of skin,
which she got after Aunty Uju straightened her hair with a hot comb in secondary
school…Ifemelu would hold her ear, tense and unbreathing, terrified that the
red-hot comb fresh from the stove would burn her but also excited by the
prospect of straight, swingy hair” (p. 251). Before she embraces her natural
hair, and ceases to use the sometimes damaging chemicals and heating methods to
change her hair, Ifemelu also tries to obtain a hair texture that more closely
matches a white aesthetic. With her Aunty Uju’s encouragement, Ifemelu wants
straight hair that hangs down. Years later, Ifemelu begins work at *Zoe*, a
Nigerian women’s magazine. Ifemelu notices of the magazine publisher, Aunty
Onenu: “...it was easy to tell that she had not been born with her light
complexion, its sheen was too waxy and her knuckles were dark, as though those
folds of skin had valiantly resisted her bleaching cream” (p. 482). The wealthy
business woman, Aunty Onenu, does not naturally have light skin, but she
attempts to lighten her skin. Aunty Onenu’s choice to use bleaching cream
reflects her preference for light skin over dark skin, regardless of the cream’s
unintended effects. The positive attention Ginika receives as a mixed-race
person, and the lengths that Ifemelu and Aunty Onenu go to for straight hair and
fair skin, respectively, demonstrate the preference for white physical
characteristics.

# Language

One way that Nigerian men and women alike show increased respect for
predominantly white culture is the way they speak. Ifemelu and her friends
remember a schoolmate, Bisi, “...a girl in the form below them, who had come
back from a short trip to America with odd affectations, pretending she no
longer understood Yoruba, adding a slurred *r* to every English word she spoke”
(p. 78). Bisi briefly visits the United States and returns to Nigeria with a
different accent when she speaks English, in an attempt to seem more American.
Furthermore, she tries to distance herself from the Yoruba language, to seem
less Nigerian. Yinika, another classmate in school with Ifemelu and Obinze, “...
went to England often and lived in Ikoyi and spoke with a British accent. She
was the most popular girl in their form, her school bag made of thick
monogrammed leather, her sandals always different from what anybody else had”
(p. 66). Yinika’s frequent trips to England, and her more British English earn
her the admiration of her peers. Her close association with England pairs
naturally with the exclusive neighborhood in which she lives, and her expensive
belongings. As an adult, Obinze attends a party in Nigeria with a Mrs.
Akin-Cole. Obinze observes of the older woman: “She spoke with the unplaceable
foreign accent, British, American and something else all at once, of the wealthy
Nigerian who did not want the world to forget how worldly she was, how her
British Airways executive card was choking with miles” (p. 36). As with Yinika,
Mrs. Akin-Cole’s accent correlates with her wealth. However, Mrs. Akin-Cole’s
accent reflects not only a British influence, but an American influence as well,
which suggests that she enjoys exposure to both countries. Throughout the novel,
Nigerian people try to hide their knowledge of Nigerian languages such as
Yoruba, and try to speak English with a more British or American accent.

# Culture

For some Nigerians, the partiality for whiteness goes beyond what they find
beautiful or what they believe sounds superior, but affects their major decision
making as well. During her university years, Ifemelu remembers: “Sister Ibinabo
started the Student Visa Miracle Vigil on Fridays, a gathering of young people,
each one holding out an envelope with a visa application form, on which sister
Ibinabo laid a hand of blessing. One girl…got an American visa the first time
she tried, and gave a tearful, excited testimony in church” (p. 120). A
respected adult in the community leads groups of young people in prayer that
asks God to allow the young people to leave Nigeria. They consider visas to exit
Nigeria and go to school in Britain and the United States a religious blessing,
and help communicate this belief - that Nigeria is an undesirable place for
students, and Britain and the United States are desirable places for students -
during church. When Obinze returns to Nigeria from England, he turns to a local
chief for business advice. The Chief tells Obinze: “Find one of your white
friends in England. Tell everybody he is your General Manager. You will see how
doors will open for you because you have an oyinbo General Manager. Even Chief
has some white men that he brings in for show when he needs them. That is how
Nigeria works” (p. 32). The Chief tells Obinze to bring a white man to his
business meetings in Nigeria, and present him as someone in a position of power.
Regardless of the white man’s educational or professional background, the man’s
whiteness alone can communicate competence, and earn trust and respect. The
Chief - a powerful, wealthy man in his own right - explains to Obinze that he
too relies on the presence of white men, (or “oyinbo,” in the Yoruba language),
to seem more legitimate in Nigerian society. At a party in Nigeria that Obinze
attends with his wife, several ladies advise them to send their young daughter
to a French or British school, but definitely not a Nigerian school. One of the
ladies says to Obinze and his wife: “You must send her to the French school.
They are very good, very rigorous. Of course they teach in French but it can
only be good for the child to learn another civilized language…If you decide to
disadvantage your child by sending her to one of these schools with half-baked
Nigerian teachers, then you only have yourself to blame” (p. 34-36). The woman
expresses approval for the French school, and believes French is a “civilized”
language, as if there are languages that are “uncivilized.” She speaks
disparagingly of Nigerian teachers and proclaims that Obinze and his wife must
know better than to allow other Nigerians to educate their child.

In Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s *Americanah*, two young Nigerian people grow into
adults that recognize a pervasive preference for whiteness in their
predominantly black country. As adults, they try to resist the way of thinking
that disparages their Nigerian heritage. Ifemelu stops chemical treatments for
her hair and begins to wear it naturally (p. 257), and she stops “faking an
American accent” (p. 213). As a married man, Obinze notices how people regularly
ask his wife if she has one white parent, if she is “half-caste.” Obinze’s wife
seems to revel in the attention, which “....discomfited him, the pleasure she
took in being mistaken for mixed-race” (p. 26). At the party where two women
tell Obinze and his wife to send their daughter to a French or British school,
Obinze pushes back, and points out that he is a Nigerian curriculum graduate.
Ifemelu and Obinze do not come to reject aspects of whiteness. They do not
challenge white standards of beauty, language, or culture. Instead, they
acknowledge that black physical features, language, and customs are not
inherently inferior, as some of their fellow Nigerians might have them believe.

---
References

Adichie. C.N. (2013). *Americanah*. Vintage Books.
