---
layout: post
title: John Grisham Creates A Hero
book_author: John Grisham
categories: 13-15
image: theodore-boone.jpg
---

Theodore Boone is not an average thirteen year old. In _Theodore Boone: Kid
Lawyer_ (2010), author John Grisham’s titular teen, Theodore Boone, helps the
people in his town with their legal problems. Children and adults alike go to
Theo for advice. In order to effectively characterize Theo as a knowledgeable,
reliable person of the law, author John Grisham utilizes several different
perspectives. The narrator in the story explicitly describes Theo’s unique
passion and attentiveness regarding the legal world. Theo himself expresses his
self assured knowledge of the law, and speaks confidently about the law to both
judges and young people his own age. Other people’s words, including comments
from Theo’s adult family members, adults that do not particularly care for Theo,
and Theo’s classmates, show how much other people respect Theo’s expertise. The
narrator’s words, Theo’s own words, the words of other people in Theo’s
community, all help to portray Theo as the legal hero that he is.

# Narrator

The narrator’s clear descriptions of Theo build the strong foundation of Theo’s
character. Early in the novel, the narrator relates: “Theo loved the courthouse,
with its air of authority, and people hustling importantly about, and somber
notices and schedules tacked to bulletin boards. Most of all, Theo loved the
courtrooms themselves…where lawyers battled like gladiators and judges ruled
like kings” (p. 5). The narrator explicitly highlights Theo’s love for the
courthouse. The narrator explains that Theo loves all of the details of the
courthouse: the atmosphere, the people, and even the small, mundane details that
other people may not notice. The narrator hyperbolizes the town courtrooms to
show how Theo sees those spaces. In Theo’s eyes, courtrooms enact more than
tedious bureaucracy. Theo views the action of the courtrooms as epic adventures.
Because Theo sees the courthouse in a unique way, he craves to be a part of that
space more than other people do. The narrator compares Theo to other young
teenagers his age: “Most of [Theo’s] classmates dreamed of getting tickets to
the big game or concert. Theo Boone lived for the big trials” (p. 18). Theo’s
classmates want to spend time at sporting or music events. Unlike them, Theo
prefers to experience courtroom drama. When Theo’s whole government class visits
the courthouse to see the beginning of Peter Duffy’s murder trial, the narrator
communicates: "So far [the class] had been riveted by the opening statements.
Not surprisingly, Theo was more engaged than the others. He was exactly where he
wanted to be” (p. 72). Again, the narrator sets Theo apart from his classmates.
While the other students do appreciate the trial, Theo’s enthusiasm rises to a
higher level than the others’. Throughout the novel, the narrator portrays Theo
as a boy with an uncommon comittment to the law.

# Theo

Theo’s own words align with the narrator’s depiction of him. Theo showcases his
abilities, for example, when he appears before Judge Yeck at Animal Court. Theo
helps his classmate, Hallie, get her escaped dog, Rocky, back. Theo says, “...I
ask the court to waive both the fine and boarding fee…Sir, the owners took all
reasonable steps to prevent their dog from getting out. As always, Rocky was
left in a secure place” (p. 152). Theo makes a bold request as he tries to help
Hallie avoid the fees associated with her dog’s escape and capture. Theo
properly addresses the judge as “sir,” and provides reasons why the fees should
be waived. He explains that Hallie and her family do take steps to secure their
dog at home. Theo’s argument for Judge Yeck demonstrates his legal knowledge and
confidence in the courtroom. Theo also displays his character when he visits
Judge Gantry to ask if he can reserve seats in the courtroom for his government
class during Peter Duffy’s murder trial. The judge agrees to Theo’s request and
sends him on his way. Just before Theo reaches the door, Judge Gantry asks Theo
if he thinks Peter Duffy is guilty, and “Theo stopped, turned around and without
hesitation responded, ‘He’s presumed innocent’” (p. 13). Theo faces the judge
with confidence. He seems to have no doubt in his answer. Theo responds in a way
that shows he knows and respects the law regarding criminal cases. Theo speaks
just as confidently to his peers as he does to adults in power. Before his
government class goes to watch Peter Duffy’s trial, Theo readies the other
students. He informs his classmates: “For those of you who watch a lot of
television, don't expect fireworks. A real trial is very different, and not
nearly as exciting. There are no surprise witnesses, no dramatic confessions, no
fistfights between the lawyers” (p. 23). Theo knows the difference between real
trials and popular dramatizations. He understands the strict rules of the
courtroom, and tries to prepare his classmates for the predictable schedule of
events. Theo speaks before his classmates as if he is a professional lawyer
himself, ready with an opening statement for them. Whether he addresses adults
or children, Theo’s words consistently convey his knowledge of the law.

# Others

When other people who know Theo talk to him or about him, Theo’s individuality
within the community becomes clear. Theo’s uncle, Ike, asks Theo if he still
wants to be a trial lawyer. When Theo tells him yes, Ike muses: "Most kids dream
of being a policeman, or a fireman, or a great athlete or actor. I’ve never seen
one so taken with the idea of being a lawyer” (p. 52). Theo’s uncle says that
Theo thinks unlike other young people. While Theo’s past and present thoughts
revolve solely around a law career, other young people generally consider a
range of exciting occupations, Ike says. A local investigator, Omar Cheepe, also
recognizes Theo’s unusual proclivity. Omar Cheepe says about Theo: "Kid thinks
he’s a lawyer. Knows every cop, every judge, every court clerk. Hangs around
courtrooms, probably knows more law than most lawyers" (p. 246). Omar Cheepe’s
initial assessment of Theo seems derogatory. However, Omar Cheepe observes for
himself how often Theo attends court, and how attentive the boy appears. Omar
Cheepe admits that he sees Theo talk to all the employees at the courthouse.
Omar Cheepe ultimately concedes that Theo really does possess extensive
knowledge about the law - as a person, not just as a child. Theo’s peers
recognize Theo’s passion and knowledge as well. They trust Theo. When Julio has
a dangerous secret, Julio brings the sensitive information to Theo alone. Julio
says to Theo: “You know what to do, right Theo?" (p. 165). Julio expresses his
confidence in Theo, both to know the law, and to help. Through the words of
other people, such as Ike, Omar, and Julio, Theo’s place in the community
becomes plain to see.

In his novel, _Theodore Boone: Kid Lawyer_, John Grisham effectively develops
Theo’s character because so many different voices help to explain Theo. The
narrator’s direct characterization of Theo shows that Theo loves the courthouse
and the courtrooms, that Theo’s favorite activity is to watch trials instead of
sports or music, and that Theo finds trials more interesting than other people
his age. Theo’s own words further support the narrator’s characterization of
him. Theo makes informed requests of judges, speaks his mind freely with judges,
and happily educates his classmates about trials. Finally, various characters in
the story - such as a family member, a townsman, and a classmate reveal their
own opinions of Theo. Through the direct and indirect characterization in the
novel, John Grisham creates a believable character in Theo Boone.

---
References

Grisham, J. (2010). _Theodore Boone: Kid lawyer_. Puffin Books.
