---
layout: post
title: "Elinor Dashwood: A Portrait of an Older Sister"
book_author: Richard Wright
categories: 16-18
image: sense-and-sensibility.jpg
---

At the heart of Jane Austen’s 1811 novel, _Sense and Sensibility_, appears the
story of two sisters: Elinor and Marianne Dashwood. Following the death of their
father, the oldest sister, Elinor, and middle sister, Marianne, along with their
youngest sister and mother, must leave their home at Norland Park. At the
invitation of a relatvie, Sir John Middleton, the Dashwood family moves into
their new home: Barton cottage. Together, Elinor and Marianne make new
acquaintances. The sisters become familiar with their new neighbors, Sir John
Middleton and his wife Lady Middleton. They meet Lady Middleton’s mother and
frequent guest, Mrs. Jennings, relatives, Anne and Lucy Steele, and the
Middletons’ family friend, Colonel Brandon. Elinor becomes attached to Mr.
Edward Ferrars, and Marianne becomes enamored with Mr. John Willoughby. As they
meet different people, including older ladies, girls their own age, and young
men, Elinor endeavors to manage her younger sister Marianne’s behavior in
society. While Marianne allows her emotions to dictate her behavior, regardless
of propriety, Elinor consistently attempts to soften the effects of Marianne’s
absences, silences, and outbursts.

# Elinor Excuses Marianne

Marianne abruptly leaves or does not appear at all in various social situations
where other people expect her, which compels Elinor to entertain people herself,
and to make excuses for her sister. At Lady Middleton’s home one day, the
hostess suggests they play a game of cards. Marianne flatly refuses, and goes to
play the piano instead. Elinor sees that Marianne’s rejection offends Lady
Middleton, and she tries to explain to Lady Middleton: “‘Marianne can never keep
long from that instrument you know, ma’am…and I do not much wonder at it; for it
is the very best toned piano-forte I ever heard.’” (p. 150). Elinor stresses
Marianne’s great love for the piano in an attempt to lessen Marianne’s insult to
Lady Middleton. Elinor also tries to compliment Lady Middleton as she highlights
the quality of Lady Middleton’s piano specifically. When Elinor and Marianne
come to London with Mrs. Jennings, Colonel Brandon visits them almost
immediately after their arrival. Colonel Brandon knocks at the door, and
Marianne, sure that their visitor must be her beloved Mr. Willoughby, cannot
conceal her surprise and disappointment to see Colonel Brandon. Upon Colonel
Brandon’s entrance, Marianne leaves the room. Colonel Brandon asks if Marianne
is ill and “Elinor answered in some distress that [Marianne] was [ill], and then
talked of headaches, low spirits, and over fatigues; and of everything to which
she could decently attribute her sister’s behavior” (p. 168). Elinor regrets
Marianne’s unfriendly behavior, and feels badly for the abandoned Colonel
Brandon. Elinor remains with Colonel Brandon and tries to give him every excuse
she can think of for Marianne’s hurtful and sudden exit. Some weeks later,
Marianne is heartbroken over Mr. Willoughby and struggles to meet social
expectations. Mariane again leaves the room when guests (the Steele sisters)
arrive. Lucy Steele tells Elinor she is sorry she cannot see Marianne, and sorry
that Marianne is unwell. Elinor says to Lucy: “You are very good. My sister will
be equally sorry to miss the pleasure of seeing you; but she has been very much
plagued lately with nervous headaches, which make her unfit for company or
conversation” (p. 227). Neither Elinor nor Marianne wants to talk to Lucy, but
Elinor feels obliged to engage in socially expected conversation. Elinor
responds politely to Lucy, and explains that Marianne cannot receive visitors at
the moment. Elinor makes excuses for her younger sister to Lady Middleton,
Colonel Brandon, and Lucy Steele in an attempt to smooth over what she sees as
Marianne’s awkward absences.

# Elinor Speaks for Marianne

Other times, Marianne does not leave a social situation, but remains noticeably
silent, in which cases Elinor also speaks on Marianne’s behalf. During one visit
with the Steele sisters, Lucy Steele compliments Lady Middleton, and “Marianne
was silent; it was impossible for her to say what she did not feel, however
trivial the occasion; and upon Elinor therefore the whole task of telling lies
when politeness required it, always fell” (p. 130). Elinor notices that Marianne
does not respond to Lucy’s compliment of Lady Middleton. As she believes that
Lucy’s observation requires a response, Elinor decides to take responsibility
for the continuation of the conversation. She agrees with Lucy’s compliment and
offers her own kind words about Lady Middleton as well. When Mrs. Jennings first
invites Elinor and Marianne to accompany her to London, Elinor initially
declines the invitation because she knows that neither she nor Marianne want to
spend so much time with Mrs. Jennings. The sisters ultimately accept solely
because of Marianne’s eagerness to be in town. During the carriage journey,
however, Marianne remains silent and inattentive to their companion, Mrs.
Jennings. Thus, “To atone for [Marianne’s] conduct therefore, Elinor took
immediate possession of the post of civility which she had assigned herself,
behaved with the greatest attention to Mrs. Jennings, talked with her, laughed
with her, and listened whenever she could…” (p. 166). Elinor notices Marianne’s
detachment, and feels that she must compensate for Marianne’s rude behavior.
Elinor engages with Mrs. Jennings because she knows that Mrs. Jennings, as the
sisters’ generous hostess, deserves the basic respect of conversation. In
London, Mrs. Jennings learns of Marianne’s broken heart, and wants to show
Marianne her support. At dinner that evening, Marianne sits at the table
silently, and almost comatose in her despair while Mrs. Jennings tries to cheer
her. While Marianne does not say a word, “Elinor, who did justice to Mrs.
Jennings’s kindness, though its effusions were often distressing, and sometimes
almost ridiculous, made her those acknowledgements, and returned her those
civilities, which her sister could not make or return for herself” (p. 200).
Mrs. Jennings sincerely wants to comfort Marianne, but Marianne remains
unresponsive. Instead, Elinor must acknowledge Mrs. Jennings’s kindness. When
Marianne remains silent in situations that beg a response, Elinor takes control
and says what she believes to be appropriate.

# Elinor Corrects Marianne

Even when Marianne remains present, and does speak, Marianne’s words do not
always meet Elinor’s standards of conduct. One day, Mr. Willoughby claims that
nobody cares about Colonel Brandon, and that nobody remembers to talk to him.
Marianne agrees completely. Elinor reprimands her sister and Mr. Willoughby; she
says to them: “Do not boast of it, however…for it is injustice in both of you.
[Colonel Brandon] is highly esteemed by all the family at the park, and I never
see him myself without taking pains to converse with him” (p. 56). Elinor does
not approve of Mr. Willoughby and Marianne’s harsh words against Colonel
Brandon. She urges them not to speak badly of Colonel Brandon, and reminds them
that Colonel Brandon is a great friend of the Middletons. Furthermore, Elinor
counters their claim when she says that _she_ does talk to Colonel Brandon. Mr.
Ferrars comes to visit the Dashwoods at Barton Cottage and asks them if they
like their neighborhood, and the Middletons. Marianne tells Mr. Ferrars no, and
Elinor quickly chides her. Elinor says: “Marianne, how can you say so? How can
you be so unjust? They are a very respectable family, Mr. Ferrars; and towards
us have behaved in the friendliest manner. Have you forgotten, Marianne, how
many pleasant days we have owed to them?” (p. 97). Elinor insists that Marianne
must not unfairly insult the Middletons. She tells Mr. Ferrars that her sister
is mistaken. Elinor reminds Marianne that their family should express gratitude
for the Middletons. At a party in London, Marianne suddenly exclaims when she
sees her favorite, Mr. Willoughby. Elinor begs her sister: “Pray, pray be
composed…and do not betray what you feel to everybody present…No, my dearest
Marianne, you must wait. This is not the place for explanations. Wait only till
tomorrow” (pp. 182, 184). After much time apart with no word, Marianne wants to
speak to Mr. Willoughby directly. Elinor fears that Marianne’s excitement to see
Mr. Willoughby, obvious for everyone to witness, is inappropriate. To save
Marianne from public humiliation, Elinor presses Marianne to restrain herself at
the party. Several times in the company of others, such as Mr. Willoughby, Mr.
Ferrars, or in a room full of party goers, Elinor disapproves of Marianne’s
professions, and tries to correct her.

_Sense and Sensibility_ follows the Dashwood sisters, Elinor and Marianne, as
they cope with the death of their father, travel to new places, meet differnet
people, and fall in love. The focus remains, however, on the relationship
between the two sisters. Specifically, author Jane Austen illustrates how much
Elinor, as the older sister, concerns herself with her younger sister, Marianne.
Marianne frequently behaves exactly as she feels, regardless of what society
expects of her. Elinor, conversely, generally tries to control her emotions
more, and tries to behave in a way that is both socially acceptable and
respectful of others. In Elinor’s mission to check her emotions, and remain calm
and respectful at all times, she also tries to keep her sister calm and
respectable at all times. Elinor’s endeavor to protect Marianne in public
consumes much of Elinor’s thoughts and words.

---
References

Austen, J. (2012). _Sense and sensibility_. HarperPerennial Classics. (Original
work published 1811).
