---
layout: post
title: The Developments of Charlotte Doyle
book_author: Rainbow Rowell
categories: 13-15
image: charlotte-doyle.jpg
---

Avi’s 1990 adventure, _The True Confessions of Charlotte Doyle_, illustrates how
drastically a person can change over time. In the story, thirteen-year-old
Charlotte Doyle travels from England back to America in order to reunite with
her parents and siblings in Rhode Island. Due to various unforeseen
circumstances, Charlotte makes the journey across the Atlantic Ocean in the
summer of 1832 unaccompanied. Without any chaperones or companions, Charlotte is
unique among the men who sail the merchant ship, the _Seahawk_. Before the ship
leaves Liverpool, Charlotte has premonitions she cannot act upon. She explains
of her acquiescent behavior: “What could I do? All my life I had been trained to
obey, educated to accept. I could hardly change in a moment” (p. 18). As a
thirteen-year-old girl, Charlotte feels powerless to make decisions based on her
own beliefs. She explains that she cannot immediately forget her upbringing. In
a completely different context aboard the ship, and away from her normal life,
Charlotte finds, however, that she is capable of change over time.

## Actions

While at first, Charlotte does no work aboard the _Seahawk_, over time, she
takes on more responsibilities. In the early days on the ship, Charlotte
professes: “With no chores to perform I spent the bulk of my day in idleness. I
could wander at will from galley to forecastle deck, mates’ mess to wheel, but
try as I might not to show it, I was sorely bored” (p. 67). None of the men on
the _Seahawk_ expect Charlotte to do any work. To the men, Charlotte is a young,
wealthy, female passenger that is of no use to them. Without a purpose,
Charlotte spends her initial days on the ship with nothing to do. However, she
soon decides to help the sailors with their work. She shares: “I found myself
spending more and more time in [the sailors’] company. In truth I had endless
questions to ask as to what this was and what was that…I actually became
something of a ‘ship’s boy,’ increasingly willing - and able- to run their minor
errands” (pp. 68-69). Despite her differences from the ship’s crew members,
Charlotte allows her curious and social nature to take over, and she disregards
traditional expectations. She notices that the more she helps the men, both her
_desire_ to help and her _skills_ increase. She comes to consider herself as a
“ship’s boy” or minor helper. As Charlotte assumes more responsibility, she
ultimately becomes like any other sailor aboard the Seahawk. She claims: “I
pounded oakum into the deck. I scraped the hull. I stood watch as dawn blessed
the sea and as the moon cut the midnight sky. I tossed the line to measure the
depths of the sea. I took my turn at the wheel. I swabbed the deck and tarred
the rigging, spliced ropes and tied knots” (p. 128). As she lists the activities
in which she becomes engaged, Charlotte repeats the word, “I” to emphasize all
of her personal work. Far from her initial idleness, Charlotte’s days become
filled with activities: pounding, scraping, watching, tossing, steering,
mopping, etc. Aboard the Seahawk, Charlotte undergoes a slow but complete
transformation from idle passenger to busy sailor.

## Appearance

As Charlotte’s activities change, so does her appearance. At the beginning of
the journey, Charlotte lives according to her previous education. She explains
one daily routine: “My day began with…a brushing of my hair for a full twenty
minutes (I did the same at night). Finally, I parted it carefully, wanting it
smoothly drawn - anything to keep it from its natural and to me obnoxious
wildness” (p. 66). Charlotte carefully practices the learned habits regarding
her hair. She devotes time to these activities every morning and evening.
Charlotte explains that the purpose of her brushing, parting and smoothing is to
make her hair look as different as possible to the way it naturally does. She
tries hard to tame what she considers to be wild hair. After some time at sea,
however, “My hair, uncombed for days, blew free in the salty air” (p. 130). On
the ship, in a different environment, Charlotte stops her former habits with her
hair. Instead of twice daily hair combing and styling, Charlotte does not bother
with her hair for days. She also seems to change the way she describes her hair.
Instead of “obnoxious,” she describes her unstyled hair as “free.” As Charlotte
continues to do more work on the ship, she comes to value functionality over
aesthetics. High up in the ship one day, Charlotte finally cuts her hair off
entirely: “With my one free arm I pulled my hair around, grasped it with the
hand entwined in the ropes, and pulled it taut. I took the knife and hacked.
With a shake of my head my thirteen year’s growth of hair fell away. Feeling
much lighter, I bit down onto the blade again and once more began to climb” (p.
140). Charlotte reaches a point during her sea voyage where she seems not to
care about her hair at all. In one moment when her hair causes her trouble, she
“hacks,” her hair off. She does not have her hair cut carefully, nor does she
take any time to think about her haircut. In an instant, she knows what she
wants to do, which is to free herself of hair that gets in her way. Charlotte
feels “lighter” and better able to do the work she wants to do. While at sea,
Charlotte slowly abandons her attention to traditional gender and class norms,
and allows her appearance to better fit her chosen lifestyle.

## Feelings

Charlotte begins her transatlantic voyage with the feeling of superiority over
the ship’s crew; however, as she begins to acquire new daily habits and a new
understanding of herself, she also begins to feel differently about others.
Towards the beginning of her journey, Charlotte makes her opinion of one
specific crew member, Zachariah, clear. She says: “Never had I met with such
impertinence! That this Zachariah, my inferior, a cook, should tell such a
slanderous tale of violence and cruelty regarding captain Jaggery to me - as
though it were a confidence - was deeply mortifying. I would not, could not
believe it!” (p.42). Charlotte finds Zachariah’s honesty with her inappropriate.
She immediately disbelieves Zachariah because of his lower class, and retains
all faith in Captain Jaggery because he is a man of higher status. Zachariah’s
admission to Charlotte makes her feel embarrassed. Charlotte emphasizes how she
does not trust Zachariah. As the time passes, though, Charlotte feels less
revolted by Zachariah. She explains: “As might be expected I fastened particular
attentions upon Zachariah. He had the most time to spend with me and had sought
to be kind, of course, from the beginning…our conversations were increasingly
free and easy” (pp. 69-70). Charlotte reasons that a friendship with Zachariah
is only natural because of the amount of free time Zachariah has, and the amount
of grace she can show. Charlotte confesses that she enjoys her conversations
with Zachariah more and more. By the conclusion of their first transatlantic
voyage together, Charlotte considers Zachariah as a family member. After being
apart for some time on land, Charlotte finds Zachariah again and tells him:
“Zachariah…I’ve decided to come home” (p. 221). Her words imply that she now
considers her presence with Zachariah at sea more familiar and attractive than
her former life. While at first Charlotte wants little to do with Zachariah, in
the end she feels most at home with him.

Thirteen-year-old Charlotte undergoes a great change aboard the Seahawk’s
journey across the Atlantic Ocean. The Charlotte that boards the ship in
Liverpool has no knowledge of the life of a sailor. Due to a combination of
circumstance and curiosity, Charlotte consciously decides to engage with the
sailors, however, and begins to assist them where she can. Her choice to take
part in the maintenance of the ship allows her to gain even more interest and
skills regarding the ship. As she becomes a more active member of the ship, she
decides to spend less time on her former preoccupations, specifically on the
maintenance of a certain appearance. Charlotte spends less and less time on her
hair until she finally rids herself of her hair. While Charlotte gains new
habits, and loses old ones, she also develops new relationships. The Charlotte
that boards the ship in Liverpool views the sailors as beneath her in status and
worth. Her mind slowly changes, though, as gets to know Zachariah. The change in
Charlotte’s life is not immediate, but it is complete. By the end of her
experience on the _Seahawk_, Charlotte gains a new perspective on work, herself,
and others.

---
References

Avi. (1990). _The true confessions of Charlotte Doyle_. Scholastic Inc.
