---
layout: post
title: First They Killed My Father
book_author: Luong Ung
categories: 18+
image: first-they-killed-my-father.jpg
published: true
---
# The Isolation Caused by the Khmer Rouge

Luong Ung’s memoir, *First They Killed My Father* (2000), recounts a young
girl’s experience as the Communist Khmer Rouge regime overturns Cambodia in the
1970s. Luong Ung begins her memoir with a description of her loving family in
their country’s capital city, Phnom Penh. Luong lives with her mother and
father, her older brothers, Meng, Khouy, and Kim, and her sisters Keav, Chou,
and Geak. The family flees the capital city together, and along the road, Luong
sees countless other families in the same situation as hers. Throughout most of
her displacement, Luong remains surrounded by other victims of the Khmer Rouge.
As Luong’s account illustrates, however, the trauma Luong and the others endure
alongside each other does not bring them closer together. The Khmer Rouge wants
to create a new society, and purports to value very specific characteristics.
The party ruthlessly persecutes individuals who do not fit their definition of
a good citizen. In this context, where any number of traits can instantly put
someone in danger, people become afraid for their lives. People under the same
pressure fear not only the Khmer Rouge, but each other - what other people
might learn about them and report about them. The practices of the Khmer Rouge
break down trust and normal interaction between Cambodian people. As ordinary
citizens continue to experience the same injustices, they grow further apart.
Luong describes how her own feelings of guilt, self-preservation, and
helplessness isolate her from those around her. Within her own extended family,
Luong shows how shared losses create spaces between family members that no one
wants to discuss. *First They Killed My Father* illustrates how the Khmer Rouge
isolates millions of Cambodian people from one another during its reign of
terror.

# Fear

The practices of the Khmer Rouge lead people to fear each other, which
effectively isolates people from one another. After Luong’s family flees the
city of Phnom Penh, they come to the village of Ro Leap. The chief and Khmer
Rouge soldiers control the village, and the local people, or base people, enjoy
special privileges because in the eyes of the Khmer Rouge, their countryside
existence makes them model citizens. Luong feels detached from all of the other
newly arrived people as well. She says of Ro Leap: “Social contact among the
new people is almost nonexistent. Everyone keeps to themselves, fearing that if
they share personal thoughts or feelings someone will report them to the
Angkar. This happens frequently now because turning someone in to the chief can
reap rewards…” (p. 64). All of the new, forcibly displaced people in Ro Leap
must begin new lives around rice farming, away from their former homes and
occupations. However, the people’s victimization does not bring them together.
As the hated group of people in the Khmer Rouge’s new society, friendships
among them are dangerous. Families do not speak to each other because they
worry that people may report any negative opinions they may reveal. The Khmer
Rouge creates an environment that encourages people to betray and fear each
other. Later, Luong goes to live at a children’s camp. Although she lives with
many other young girls in the same situation, Luong knows: “...I am alone here,
even though I eat the same food and sleep in the same hut with eighty girls…we
live together in silence. We keep to ourselves because we are all hiding
secrets. My secret is our lives in Phnom Penh. For another girl, it may be that
she has a handicapped brother…” (p. 136). Physically, Luong is never alone. She
spends her days and nights surrounded by other girls who are also away from
their families. However, even the young girls do not risk communication with
one another. Several aspects of Luong’s former life in Phnom Penh are dangerous
to mention. (Contemptible facts according to the Khmer Rouge include Luong’s
Buddhist, French-speaking father and his former position as a military
policeman for the Lon Nol government, the family’s Chinese ancestry, their
large apartment, and Mazda car). Luong can only guess what the other girls hide
about themselves. Separated from their families, the young girls at the
children’s camp do not turn to each other for comfort because they are afraid
to reveal their true, multi-faceted identities. The fear in Cambodia is so
extreme at the time, that families believe they must shut themselves away from
others entirely. Luong relates: “Kim tells me that from now on I have to watch
out for myself. Not only am I never to talk to anyone about our former lives,
but I’m never to trust anyone either. It is best if I just stop talking
completely so I won’t unintentionally disclose information about our family”
(p. 47). Luong’s brother, Kim, tells Luong that she now only has herself. He
tells her that she cannot trust or speak to anyone. In order to avoid an
incriminating disclosure of any kind, Luong must remain silent. Fear of the
Khmer Rouge keeps Luong and her family isolated from other people who endure
the same injustices, which prevents the formation of bonds between people of
all ages, in any circumstance, and stops even basic human interaction.

# Experiences 

Aside from the Khmer Rouge’s fear campaign, the desolation that the regime
causes further contributes to the breakdown of human connections. While at Ro
Leap, Luong’s father manages to secure a small amount of rice to supplement the
family’s meager rations. One night, Luong secretly eats a bit of the uncooked
rice. Luong’s parents never blame anyone for the missing rice, but Luong feels
intense guilt and thinks: “...I know I am bad and deserve whatever low
life-form I will be reincarnated as in the next life. Who else but a bad person
would cause the starvation of her family for her own selfish stomach? From that
day on, I stay more and more to myself” (p. 90). The shared experience of
starvation does not bring the family closer together. The individuals suffer in
their own ways. Desperate for food, six-year-old Luong takes rice from the
family’s communal container. Luong feels terrible about her action, and
convinces herself that she is inherently a bad person. In her guilt, she tells
herself that she is to blame for the hunger of the rest of her family and
deserves punishment. Luong’s guilt and self-loathing cause her to retreat from
her family members. When the Vietnamese army attacks the girls’ camp where
Luong lives, Luong remembers her feeling of helplessness as a wounded girl
calls for help: “Her hand grabs her chest as she coughs out blood. I want to
help her. I wish to help her, but I am much smaller than she. I scream and
cover my ears as another mortar explodes nearby. Panicked, I turn my back on
her and jump out of the hut. When the roof collapses, the girl continues to
scream long anguished cries as flames engulf the hut” (p. 166). As Vietnamese
mortars destroy the camp, Luong witnesses the suffering of another girl. In the
same room as the wounded girl, Luong sees and hears the girl’s need. While she
immediately wants to help the girl, Luong feels helpless. Ultimately, Luong
does not attempt to help the wounded girl, and flees the dorm without her. In
the girl’s final moments, Luong abandons the girl and witnesses her death.
While so physically close, Luong watches their fates seem to arbitrarily
diverge. Even with other survivors, however, there often seem to be no words or
actions that can offer support. When Luong finds herself near a boy who loses
family members, she thinks: “My heart leaps for him. I want to reach out to
him, but instead I turn and walk away. He is alone now too” (p. 199). Luong
also experiences the loss of family members during the reign of the Khmer
Rouge. She empathizes completely with the boy. She *wants *to comfort him.
However, she feels that regardless of their shared experience, she has nothing
to offer the boy. Luong’s sentiment causes her to forgo contact with the boy
and also contributes to her sense of helplessness and worthlessness. The
starvation, violence, and familial loss that Luong experiences, and witnesses,
cause her to sink further inside of herself, and to believe that just as other
people cannot help her, she has nothing good to offer other people.

# Loss

Within Luong’s family, the loss of family members does not bring the survivors
closer together. At one point during the family’s displacement, several of the
family members reunite. Luong observes, “No one in the family has ever
explicitly stated that we are not to bring [those who are gone] up in our
conversations. Yet we all know not to speak about them. Each of us keeps our
memories of them private and safely locked in the boxes of our own hearts” (p.
154). The reality of Luong’s missing brother, sister, and father pains everyone
in her family. Everyone remains acutely aware of the missing family members,
but no one wants to highlight their absences and potentially upset someone. The
missing family members become taboo. Memories become private. Later, Luong’s
older brother Kim must tell her other brothers the sad news about their parents
and youngest sister. As Luong lays in a hammock nearby, “They whisper to each
other, as if trying to shield Chou and me from news we already knew. I shut my
eyes, not wanting to see Meng and Khouy’s faces as they receive the news” (p.
202). The sisters Luong and Chou already know about their parents and youngest
sister. However, their brother, Kim, does not want Luong and Chou to hear about
their losses again. Kim wants to spare Luong and Chou. Luong does not want to
be a part of the conversation either. She purposely avoids her brothers’ faces
as they learn about the loss of their family members. The siblings do not want
to talk about their family’s losses. When the surviving siblings arrive at the
home of their mother’s brother, Luong relates her behavior when the family
begins to talk about the war. She says, “I pretend to have no memory of it.
They do not ask me about my experiences. In our culture, it is enough that the
oldest child relates the family’s story. Children are not asked for opinions,
feelings, or what they individually endure. I do not volunteer
information…Often I walk away from their chatter” (p. 212). Again, an
understanding seems to persist among the family members. Luong does not
communicate her feelings, and her family members do not ask her any questions.
Luong and her Uncle Leang mourn the same people, but they find that they do not
connect over their shared loss. Throughout her life under the Khmer Rouge, and
afterwards, Luong and her family members bear their losses alone.

Loung Ung’s memoir, *First They Killed My Father*, recounts the emotional
isolation that mass persecution inflicts. The author describes how she first
learns about the new party in power, and how her family flees their home in
Phnom Penh. She highlights the various places the Khmer Rouge forces her to
live and work, and finally, how she manages to escape the regime. As the Khmer
Rouge causes the displacement, pain, and deaths of millions of Cambodian
people, the regime sows a terror that also isolates individuals from other
people. The Khmer Rouge relies on fear to keep people disconnected and
powerless. Persecuted individuals avoid social interaction because they worry
that other people may report their opinions, discover incriminating aspects of
their identity, or learn personal information about them of any kind. Under the
control of armed soldiers, the civilians do not have the power to effectively
unite and resist. Luong describes how helpless she feels as her family starves,
as other girls call to her for help, and as she witnesses other children lose
family members. Luong suffers the deaths of her own family members under the
Khmer Rouge. As Luong loses loved ones, she sees how only unspeakable memories
remain. Throughout her memoir, Luong Ung illustrates one of the Khmer Rouge’s
most tragic effects: the alienation of innocent people from one another.

---
References

L. Ung. (2000). *First they killed my father: A daughter of Cambodia
remembers.* Harper Collins Publishers.
