---
layout: post
title: "Percy Jackson: The Twelve-Year-Old King of Comedy"
book_author: Richard Wright
categories: 10-12
image: the-lightening-thief.jpg
---
In Rick Riordan’s 2005 adventure novel, *The Lightning Thief*,
twelve-year-old Percy Jackson faces serious challenges. First, Percy
struggles with what he considers to be a bad time in school. He feels
that he is always in trouble with adults at school, he does not enjoy
many of his classmates, and he struggles with his attention deficit
disorder and dyslexia. Percy leaves his school, Yancy Academy, for the
summer, and finds himself at the summer camp, Camp Half-Blood. At this
very unusual summer camp, Percy learns new information about his
heritage and discovers that his life is in danger. Ultimately, Percy
meets the Greek god of the dead, Hades, in the Underworld. As Percy
faces his many challenges, he maintains a positive attitude and a good
sense of humor. Percy’s humor manifests in different ways. First, he
uses hyperbole, or exaggerated statements, to make normal situations
absurdly exceptional. In situations that are truly impressive, Percy
does the opposite, and downplays the events. Percy also likes to compare
expectations with outcomes, specifically when the real life event is
contrary to what he anticipates. Throughout his time at Yancy Academy,
Camp Half-Blood, and the Underworld, Percy uses various types of humor
to lighten the mood.

# Hyperbole 

*The Lightning Thief* begins with Percy as a normal sixth grade student
at Yancy Academy. When Percy and his classmates go on a field trip to
Manhattan, the school worries about Percy’s behavior on the field trip
because of his past infractions. Percy relates, “The headmaster had
threatened me with death by in-school suspension if anything bad,
embarrassing, or even mildly entertaining happened on this trip” (p. 3).
The headmaster warns that if Percy causes a problem, Percy may face an
in-school suspension, a common school consequence to a serious violation
of school rules. However, Percy equates an in-school suspension with
“death.” Furthermore, Percy claims that he faces an execution even if
something “even mildly entertaining” happens. Percy hyperbolizes the
headmaster’s potential punishment, to a nonsensical, humorous level. On
the day of the field trip, Percy says, “...our sixth-grade class took a
field trip to Manhattan - twenty-eight mental-case kids and two teachers
on a yellow school bus, heading to the Metropolitan Museum of Art to
look at ancient Greek and Roman stuff. I know - it sounds like torture”
(p. 2). In some ways, Percy describes a typical field trip, in that
there are students and teachers together on a school bus to visit
somewhere outside the classroom. The field trip sounds even better than
average because Percy and his classmates are on their way to the largest
city in the United States, to visit a world renowned art museum.
Although Percy’s description of the field trip seems normal, and even
exciting, he describes the field trip as, “torture.” Percy’s displeasure
leads him to exaggerate the nature of the day, and to describe the trip
as extreme suffering. At the beginning of Summer vacation, Grover and
Percy take a bus from Yancy Academy together. Grover shows Percy a
business card that makes Percy think: “The card was in fancy script,
which was murder on my dyslexic eyes…” (p. 23). Percy’s dyslexia makes
reading a challenge, and certain types of font make words even more
difficult to read. While the unusual script on the card might cause
Percy to struggle, the written words do not “murder” him. Percy likens
an in-school suspension, a field trip, and the script on a card to
death, torture, and murder, respectively. Percy exaggerates his
experience with school and reading to make commonplace, or at least
manageable realities, seem comically extreme.

# Understatement

Following Percy’s experience at Yancy Academy and other schools, the
world of Greek gods and goddesses at Camp Half-Blood feels easy. In a
dream Percy has about a real conflict between gods, Percy sees the gods
Zeus and Poseidon fight over Zeus’s master lightning bolt. Percy sees
that: “...two men were fighting. They looked like TV wrestlers,
muscular, with beards and long hair…Over the roar of the storm, I could
hear the blue-robed one yelling at the green-robed one,* Give it back!
Give it back! *Like a kindergartener fighting over a toy” (p. 129). The
“blue-robbed one,” or Zeus, and the “green-robed one,” Poseidon, are two
of the most powerful Greek gods. The two gods look like strong, grown
men, yet Percy thinks they fight as small children do. Percy sees Zeus,
the strongest of the gods, fight like “a kindergartner over a toy.”
Percy’s likening of Zeus to a kindergarten age child diminishes the
immortal’s importance and seriousness. Similarly, when Percy visits an
oracle in the Big House attic, he claims: “The attic was filled with
Greek hero junk: armor stands covered in cobwebs; once bright shields
pitted with rust; old leather steamer trunks plastered with stickers
saying ITHAKA, CIRCE’S ISLE, and LAND OF THE AMAZONS” (p. 139). Percy
equates ancient Greek artifacts with useless items of little value. The
artifacts come from famous places in Greek mythology such as Ithaka, the
home island of the character Odysseus in the epic poem, *Odyssey*,
“Circe’s isle,” the home island of the Greek goddess, Circe, and the
“land of the Amazons,” the mysterious home of the female warrior
civilization. When Percy leaves camp Half-Blood on his first quest, he
turns for one last look and sees: “Under the pine tree that used to be
Thalia, daughter of Zeus, Chiron was now standing in full horse-man
form, holding his bow high in salute. Just your typical summer-camp
send-off by your typical centaur” (p. 156). The existence of Greek gods,
centaurs, and half-bloods that can turn into trees, is all new to Percy.
Thus, what Percy sees at camp Half-Blood as he departs is anything but
typical for him. Percy’s understated observations at Camp Half-Blood -
his depictions of Zeus as a kindergartener, of priceless Greek
antiquities as junk, and of the centaur, Chiron, as a typical
summer-camp counselor - bring levity to the world of ancient Greek
mythology. 

# Irony

When Percy arrives at the Underworld to visit the Greek god, Hades, his
experience there has the potential to be terrifying. However, the
Underworld, the creatures there, and Hades himself are not what Percy
expects. The irony Percy encounters in the Underworld makes his entire
experience less frightening, and more funny. When Percy first arrives,
he observes: “I’m not sure what I was expecting - Pearly Gates, or a big
black portcullis, or something. But the entrance to the Underworld
looked like a cross between airport security and the Jersey Turnpike”
(p. 290). Percy expects a grand entrance to the Underworld - a storied,
physical symbol to mark the beginning of a significant place. Instead,
Percy encounters a familiar, and mundane transportation scene. The
modern, unexciting reality of the entrance to the Underworld, contrary
to his expectations, makes the beginning of Percy’s journey there funny,
not scary. At the entrance, Percy also expects to see Cerberus, the
three-headed dog in Greek mythology that guards the entrance to the
Underworld. When Percy approaches the entrance, he notices: “The
three-headed dog, Cerberus, who was supposed to guard Hades’s door, was
nowhere to be seen” (p. 291). Again, Percy experiences the opposite of
what he expects. Although he prepares himself to face a fierce beast, he
sees nothing. In the Underworld, Percy finds Hades and discovers that
yet again, his expectations do not match reality. Percy thinks Hades
wants a war, so that Hades can have more subjects in the Underworld, but
Hades does not want that. Hades says to Percy: “Do you think I need more
subjects? Did you not see the sprawl of the Asphodel Fields? Have you
any idea how much my kingdom has swollen this past century alone, how
many subdivisions I’ve had to open…No, godling. I need no help getting
subjects!” (p. 312). Percy expects Hades to want war, and death.
Instead, Hades focuses on urban development. Hades concerns himself with
the “sprawl,” and “subdivisions,” because he wants to be a good ruler,
and wants the Underworld to run smoothly. Hades, Cerberus, and the
entire Underworld surprise Percy. Nothing about the Underworld proves to
be as sinister as Percy expects. The ironic situations that Percy
experiences in the Underworld make the morbid setting amusing.

Percy’s approach to life allows him to make light of anything that comes
his way. While still at Yancy Academy, Percy doesn’t always talk about
his struggles with school in a straightforward way. Percy avoids serious
explanations of his feelings when he hyperbolizes his challenges at
Yancy Academy. The way Percy talks about behavioral consequences, the
time he must spend with classmates and teachers, and his learning
disorder, takes the focus off the problems and places them behind a
layer of humor. The extreme negative language he uses to describe his
issues (which are real, but commonplace challenges for young people),
pushes the topics out of serious conversation and into the ridiculous.
At Camp Half-Blood, Percy finds himself in a truly extreme situation,
yet consistently minimizes and even trivializes the wonders he sees.
When Percy shares perceptions of the world of the gods without any sense
of awe, he shares a fresh understanding of them. His flippant
descriptions of the gods, creatures, and relics of Greek mythology
brings a silliness to ancient legends. Last, Percy’s point of view
replaces fear with comedy in the Underworld. Percy comes to understand
the Underworld not as a place of eternal suffering, but as an
unthreatening society with familiar decisions to make. Percy’s use of
hyperbole, understatement, and irony brings lighthearted entertainment
to his adventures.

---
References

Riordan, R. (2005). *Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The lightning
thief*. Hyperion Books.
