---
layout: post
title: Insights from a Cowboy's Journal
book_author: Walter Dean Myers
categories: 10-12
image: a-black-cowboy.jpg
published: true
---


Walter Dean Myers’s 1999 novel, *The Journal of Joshua Loper: A Black Cowboy*,
illustrates how powerful and intimate indirect descriptions can be. In the
story, Joshua Loper lives with his mother on a Mr. Muhlen’s ranch in Texas.
Joshua communicates his feelings and observations through journal entries over
the course of the first cattle drive he works from Texas to Kansas in 1871. New
to the trail, Joshua joins the experienced Captain Hunter and other cowboys
such as Isaiah and Chubb. Joshua’s indirect descriptions fit with the image of
the 19th century American cowboy as a stoic man among men. Joshua’s words also
align with the epistolary style of the novel. In his journal, Joshua writes his
private thoughts for himself. As he does not write for an audience, Joshua does
not see the need to over explain himself for others to easily understand.
Instead, Joshua writes in a way that assumes understanding. He records events
and observations in a way that implies his feelings. He uses idioms that other
people may not recognize, and he uses similes that reflect his personal
perspective. Joshua’s indirect descriptions, his implications, idioms, and
similes, all serve as a window to Joshua’s mind, and allow the reader to infer
Joshua’s feelings and gain a keen understanding of him.

# Implications

Whenever Joshua communicates his feelings, he tends not to use adjectives or
explain himself directly. Joshua writes of his father, Nehemiah: “...he decided
to go up to Ohio, looking for work. He had a game leg from a wound he had got
in Petersburg, Virginia, but Mama said he would be all right and when he found
a steady job he would send for us. I knew he would, too” (p. 7). Joshua does
not explicitly say so, but his words imply that he and his mother trust
Nehemiah completely. They both feel confident that Nehemiah can find a job, and
will tell them to join him as soon as possible. Despite his wound from the
American Civil War, Nehemiah remains a highly esteemed, capable husband and
father in his wife and son’s eyes. Joshua conveys his pride and confidence in
his father without a direct declaration. At first, Joshua feels very
differently about Captain Hunter. When Joshua sees the captain, he thinks:
“[the captain’s] eyes were a light blue and he had a way of fixing them on your
that made you with you could be someplace else” (p. 11). Joshua gives a direct
description of one of the Captain’s physical features - his eyes - but he
describes how the Captain makes him feel, indirectly. Joshua says that the
Captain has the ability to look at him and make him so uncomfortable, he wants
to go away. The description implies that the Captain intimidates Joshua, and
that Joshua prefers not to draw the Captain’s attention. At some point along
the trail, Joshua says of his friend, Isaiah:  “I have never thought of
shooting a man down in cold blood, but if I do shoot a man, it will surely be
Isaiah Fatbelly Cotton. Either that or I would like to hit him across the head
with a running iron and leave my mark on him” (p. 41). Joshua never says he
feels angry or betrayed, but the emotions are implicit in the way he describes
his thoughts about Isaiah in the moment. Joshua communicates his murderous
feelings towards Isaiah are new to him. Isaiah clearly pushes Joshua to a new
level of anger, where Joshua feels so enraged that he wants to cause Isaiah
physical harm. Joshua gives specific examples, rather than explicit
descriptions, that illustrate his feelings towards his father, Captain Hunter,
and his friend, Isaiah.

# Idioms

Throughout his journal, Joshua records the idioms he hears from older men, and
while he understands them, he does not bother to explain them. Joshua reveals
that while he takes pride in his schooling and ability to read, he must be
careful with his education. Joshua writes, “Mr. Muhlen told me to go ahead and
learn all I could, but don’t be washing nobody’s face in my learning because
that is how people got themselves hurt. Isaiah said the same thing” (p. 37).
People on the ranch tell Joshua not to “wash anybody’s face.” He understands
the warning to mean that he must not correct or counter people, and thus
embarrass them. If he behaves too forwardly about his education, he may put
himself in a dangerous position with people who do not like him. Joshua tries
to remain modest, but curious. One evening, Joshua asks Chubb questions Chubb
does not want to hear. Chubb tells Joshua: “Let me ask you something…Did the
Captain tell you to come over here and look out for horse thieves or come chew
my ear off?” (p. 40). Joshua understands that when Chubb says “chew my ear
off,” Chubb means that Joshua talks too much. The idiom emphasizes the
unpleasantness of too many questions, and Joshua’s place as an irritating young
person. When the cowboys reach their destination in Abilene, Kansas, Captain
Hunter recognizes Joshua for his fine work as a cowboy. However, Captain Hunter
tempers his praise when he tells Joshua: “...don’t go buying no bigger hat
size, ’cause you still got a lot to learn” (p. 122). Joshua knows that the
Captain says not to buy a bigger hat because Joshua should not develop a “big
head,” or any arrogance regarding his skills. The Captain tells Joshua not to
feel any conceit. The idiomatic expressions that Joshua hears, understands, and
records in his journal, he does not explain. However, the idioms help explain
the cowboys in Joshua’s life, his relationship to them, and what he learns from
them.

# Similes

At a particularly rough point for Joshua along the trail, he reflects on his
experience as he rides the horse, Thunder: “With Thunder bouncing me around
like that and all the drags acting like they had their own timetables to keep,
my rear end felt like I had spent six months trying to hatch a porcupine” (pp.
42-43). Joshua doesn’t explicitly say that his bottom is painful. However, he
relates the specific problems at that time. First, Joshua’s horse bounces him
in the saddle, which lifts and drops him repeatedly. Second, the slowest cattle
do not seem to care about the cowboys’ desired pace - the slow pace of the
cattle keeps Joshua on his horse for long hours. The simile Joshua uses to
describe his pain includes the image of a chicken that sits on a spiky
porcupine instead of a smooth egg. As a cowboy on the trail, the image of a
farm animal and a wild animal come naturally to him. He uses the images of the
animals to describe the sharp pangs of pain he feels. In Late June, Joshua and
the cowboys cross paths with a band of soldiers. Joshua says of the black
soldiers: “They carried themselves like they owned the world…One got off his
horse so slow he could have been a picture that was moving instead of a man”
(p. 80). The black soldiers make an impression on Joshua; he perceives them to
be confident and elegant. The soldiers are most likely similar to Joshua in
that they live a harsh life outdoors. As soldiers, they most definitely answer
to a leader, and have few personal possessions with them. However, Joshua
imagines them as men who answer to no one, and want for nothing, men who “own
the world.” He watches them move and appreciates their unhurried,
“picturesque,” manner. Although Joshua may not realize the change himself, the
great power of nature he experiences on the trail begins to empower him as
well. Joshua observes: “Last night the sky was full of stars. It looked like
they were crowding each other, tumbling and sparkling in the night sky…I felt
like I could open myself and get as big as the sky” (p. 82). Joshua feels a
connection to the night sky that invigorates him. He sees stars that “crowd
each other” and “tumble” like playful youths, but at the same time, they
“sparkle.” Joshua feels that although he is young, he is capable of greatness.
Joshua communicates his feelings of pain, admiration, and empowerment in his
own unique way.

Joshua Loper’s indirect characterizations make sense in the journal of a
cowboy. He doesn’t say exactly how he feels about people like his father,
Captain Hunter, or his friend, Isaiah, but he gives examples and descriptions
that imply his feelings. Joshua implies that he *trusts* his father, feels
*uncomfortable* around Captain Hunter, and becomes *angry* with Isaiah, all
without the use of those words. Joshua’s use of idioms, that reflect the 19th
century American West, also fit within the context of the novel. The idioms
that Mr. Muhlen, Chubb, and Captain Hunter use when they speak to Joshua reveal
a good deal of information. They highlight the opinions of Mr. Muhlen, Chubb,
and Captain Hunter, and also how they view Joshua specifically. The idioms show
the cowboys communicate with each other indirectly as well. Mr. Muhlen never
says, “be careful,” Chubb does not say, “I’m tired,” or “I’m not interested in
your questions, Joshua.” Similarly, Captain Hunter does not tell Joshua, “stay
humble.” Instead, Mr. Muhlen and the cowboys express their feelings or give
Joshua advice in an indirect way. Finally, Joshua often avoids direct
professions of his emotions, and instead uses similes couched in his experience
as a cowboy to convey meaning. The use of indirect descriptions not only adds
to the realism of *The Journal of Joshua Loper. *The language also provides
readers with raw glimpses into Joshua’s world and mind, and allows readers to
make their own inferences.

--- 
References

Myers, W.D. (1999). *The journal of Joshua Loper: A black cowboy*. Scholastic.
