---
layout: post
title: Kirsten Larson Moves to a New Country
book_author: Janet Shaw
categories: 10-12
image: meet-kirsten.webp
---

In Janet Shaw’s 1986 novel, _Meet Kirsten_, Kirsten Larson and her family face daunting challenges when they move to a new country. Kirsten’s Uncle Olav is the first family member to travel from Sweden to Minnesota. Olav writes the family to tell them that the land in Minnesota is “rich and good” (p. 7), so Kirsten’s parents decide to join Uncle Olav in Minnesota. In the year 1854, the Larsons leave their home in Sweden. Throughout the long journey, the family members remain hopeful. However, they face many hardships at each stage along the way. At sea, the family lives at the mercy of the water and wind, which threaten to sink the ship at any point. Inside the ship, many families must endure a small, dark space. The threat of disease lingers throughout the sea voyage. In New York, the Larsons must navigate the new city without contacts, local knowledge, or fluency in English. During the final stage of their journey, from New York to Minnesota, the Larsons discover several unknowns. Kirsten learns about new technology, life with no money, and new family members. The Larson family's ship journey across the Atlantic Ocean, time in New York, and overland journey from New York to Minnesota are full of challenges that threaten the success of their immigration. 

## Sailing the Atlantic

At the beginning of her journey, Kirsten experiences the dangers, discomforts, and uncertainties of nineteenth century sea voyaging. At one point, Kirsten’s father says to her, “There’s a storm coming…It could be dangerous. The coast is rocky here, and the wind is getting stronger” (pp. 3-4). Aboard the _Eagle_, Kirsten and the other passengers are vulnerable to nature. Kirsten’s father warns her that while they are aboard the ship, storms are a serious threat to their safety. The water, wind, and nearby rocks are dangers that they cannot control. During the storms, Mr. Larson wants Kirsten to stay below deck. However, Kirsten dreads the cabin. She relates: “...it was awful to stay in this small room below the deck. For more than two months, twenty Swedish families had been cramped together here…The air smelled sour now, and it would be worse when people got seasick…the hold was dark, even in the middle of the afternoon” (pp. 4-5). Kirsten describes miserable conditions below deck. For an extended period of time, the Larsons and other families have very little space to move or privacy. With little to no fresh air, their quarters have a bad smell. In the darkness they cannot see very well, regardless of the time of day. Even if the Larsons reach New York, they still may not receive permission to leave the ship. Mr. Larson tells Kirsten:  “Almost everyone gets seasick on the ocean. The health inspector looks for illnesses like typhoid and cholera. Illnesses that kill people” (p. 10). Mr. Larson explains that seasickness is the least of their worries. People on the ships often contract more serious diseases such as typhoid or cholera. If the one of the Larsons contracts a disease, not only may he or she die from the illness, but a health inspector may also refuse the person entry into New York. As Kirsten learns, the ship voyage is perilous, uncomfortable, and does not guarantee a welcome arrival. 

## Navigating New York

When Kirsten and her family arrive in New York, they face the challenges of a new country. Mrs. Larson asks her husband, “Did you find an honest agent? Old Mr. Peterson was cheated of his money by a dishonest agent” (p. 14). The family needs to hire help in order to reach their final destination in Minnesota. As they are new arrivals, they lack friends and business contacts. Just as the Larsons do not know many people in New York, they have no familiarity with their surroundings. When Kirsten goes out with her father and brother, she suddenly loses them in the crowded streets. Kirsten wonders: “Where was the milk shop?...now Kirsten realized she didn’t know where the park was, either. Which way had she come with Papa? How many corners had they turned?” (pp. 17,19). Kirsten realizes she does not know the way to the milk shop, she does not know where she is, and she does not know the way back to her starting point. A woman attempts to speak to Kirsten but they do not speak the same language. Kirsten sees that, “The woman didn’t understand. [The woman] looked puzzled and shook her head, and more tears ran down Kirsten’s cheeks” (pp. 21-22). Even when someone notices Kirsten in her distress, Kirsten cannot easily communicate with the local people. The frustrating isolation that Kirsten experiences because of the language barrier makes her feel even worse. The Larson family’s arrival in New York shows Kirsten how hard life can be when people find themselves in a place where they have no local contacts, don’t know the city, and can’t speak the dominant language.

## Journeying to Minnesota

As they leave New York, the Larsons face new technology with which they are not familiar. When they arrive to board the train to Chicago, Kristen remembers: “First there was a fierce roar and a hiss, then the long scream of a whistle. Kirsten’s heart flip-flopped. Maybe Marta was right to be afraid of trains…Kirsten stayed close to Mama. But Mama was worried, too” (p. 28). At first, the train seems like a dangerous creature to Kirsten. She imagines that it roars, hisses, and screams, like a lion, snake, or demon might. The train makes sounds that are loud and unfamiliar to Kirsten, and they make her nervous. Although she tries to seek comfort from her mother, Kirsten realizes that the train is new and intimidating for her mother as well. At the last stretch of the journey, Mr. Larson tells the family, “We don’t have enough money left to rent a horse and wagon…we’ll take what we can carry now, and we’ll have the trunks shipped later” (p. 42). With no money left, the family faces an unforeseen reality, and must quickly adapt. Suddenly, the Larsons have fewer options and resources available to them. Without a horse and wagon, everyone in the family must find the physical strength to make the rest of the journey of foot. They must leave the bulk of their belongings behind them. As they leave their belongings, they can do nothing but hope that their belongings are safe without them. When the Larsons arrive on foot at Uncle Olav’s farm, “Suddenly Kirsten was shy. She shrank back behind Mama” (p. 45). Finally, Kirsten reunites with family members who share her language and culture. However, these family members seem like strangers to Kirsten. She does not immediately feel herself. After years of separation, Kirsten needs some time to get to know her own aunt, uncle, and cousins before she feels entirely comfortable and confident.

Throughout the journey from Sweden to Minnesota, the Larsons remain hopeful. However, the journey proves to be long and difficult. At sea, the family spends months in fear of storms. Wind, rain, and crashing waves threaten to cast them into the sea. Below deck, the cramped, dark, and malodorous quarters create a grim environment. The conditions make them susceptible to diseases that could kill them or prevent their admittance at their destination. When the Larsons leave the troubles of the ship, they become keenly aware of everything they do not have in New York. In the new city, they lack friends, local knowledge, and language skills. When they leave New York for Minnesota, they encounter numerous unknowns. At the beginning of their journey west, the Larsons must board a train for the first time. At the end of their journey, they must leave their belongings in town and walk the rest of the way into the wilderness. Upon their arrival at their new home in Minnesota, Kirsten realizes the family members there are like strangers to her. The Larsons’ immigration experience illustrates the challenges that families can face when they move to a new country.

---
References

Shaw, J. (1986). _Meet Kirsten: An American girl_. Pleasant Company Incorporated.
