---
layout: post
title: The Absence of Adult Support in Panem
book author: Suzanne Collins
categories: 16-18
image: Hungergamescover.jpg
published: true
---

_The Hunger Games_ (2012), by Suzanne Collins, presents a world in which the adults consistently fail the children. The teenagers, Katniss, Gale, and Peeta, as well as many other children in the nation of Panem, cannot rely on adults to keep them safe. Officials in the capital of Panem organize an annual competition amongst children from each district between the ages of twelve and eighteen. The competition, called the Hunger Games, requires the child participants to kill each other, until only one competitor remains. The yearly battle serves as the pinnacle of injustice that the young people of Panem must endure, but even outside of the Hunger Games arena, the children face the failings of the adults around them. In District 12, Katniss, Gale, and Peeta know that their parents are not their greatest protectors. Other adults in local institutions responsible for the care, health, and education of children regularly neglect their duties. When Peeta and Katniss must participate in the Hunger Games, the adults assigned to assist them are painfully flawed. The children of District 12 are victims not only of the villains who facilitate the Hunger Games, but of all the adults that should care for them. 

# Parents

Katniss, Gale, and Peeta each suffer in their own parents’ homes. Katniss explains how her family changes following the death of Katniss’s father. Katniss relates: “...my mother [was] expected to get a job. Only she didn’t. She didn’t do anything but sit propped up in a chair or, more often, huddled under the blankets on her bed…At eleven years old, with Prim just seven, I took over as head of the family” (pp. 26-27). As the sole surviving parent, Katniss’s mother must provide for her daughters. However, Katniss’s mother becomes debilitated when her husband dies. She does not leave the house or manage to do much around the house. She confines herself to her chair or her bed. As a child, Katniss begins to work to keep her family alive. Katniss does not simply begin to help with more chores, she assumes full responsibility of her household. Katniss loses trust in her mother then, as she learns that her mother cannot protect her. Katniss’s friend Gale experiences a similar situation at home: “Gale, who is eighteen and has been either helping or single-handedly feeding a family of five for seven years, will have his name in forty-two times” (p. 13). Like Katniss, Gale becomes the head of his household as a child. At first he contributes to the family’s provision of food, but eventually he “single-handedly” feeds his family. Besides Gale’s responsibility as the sole provider, he must also take on additional risks. As the food Gale can procure on a regular basis is not enough, he submits his name into the Hunger Games draw more than is required in exchange for additional rations of food. Peeta lives with both of his parents and enjoys relatively more food security than Gale and Katniss, but endures violence at the hands of his mother. One day, Katniss hears Peeta’s mother strike his face. Katniss remembers, “There was a clatter in the bakery and I heard [Peeta’s mother] screaming again and the sound of a blow…I was watching him. Because of the bread, because of the red weal that stood out on his cheekbone. What had she hit him with?” (p. 30). Peeta’s mother screams at him when he makes a mistake, and physically hurts him. Katniss sees for herself the immediate evidence of the woman’s violence on Peeta’s face. The sound Katniss hears and the injury she sees lead her to believe the woman uses something more than her hand to strike Peeta. Katniss, Gale, and Peeta do not experience consistent care from their parents within their homes.

# Institutions 

The community in which Katniss, Gale and Peeta live does not support them. Gale and Katniss are not the only young people in District 12 who experience food insecurity. Katniss reveals: “Starvation’s not an uncommon fate in District 12. Who hasn’t seen the victims? Older people who can’t work. Children from a family with too many to feed. Those injured in the mines…Starvation is never the cause of death officially. It’s always the flu, or exposure, or pneumonia” (p. 28). In District 12, Katniss claims that everyone sees starving people amongst them. Starvation remains a well-known, yet unaddressed problem. Katniss highlights elderly people, young people in large families, and people with disabilities as some of the most vulnerable. Not only do some people in the community starve to death, District officials suppress the truth about these deaths. Katniss knows that starvation is a risk for her family as well, but she tries to hide her mother’s condition and how badly the family needs help at home. Katniss knows she and Prim cannot ask for help because: “...the district would have taken us away...and placed us in the community home. I’d grown up seeing those home kids at school. The sadness, the marks of angry hands on their faces, the hopelessness that curled their shoulders forward” (p. 27). Katniss knows that she, Prim, and her mother cannot expect any assistance from the District. Katniss expects the forcible removal of herself and her sister if her mother’s struggles become public knowledge. Katniss does not want to go to a community home with other children because the children who live there appear so unhappy. She sees evidence of physical abuse on the children and wants to spare herself and her sister from beatings. The despair of the children at the community home manifests in the way the children carry themselves. The adults whose duty it is to care for displaced children mistreat their wards. Finally, Katniss laments her education: “Somehow it all comes back to coal at school. Besides basic reading and math most of our instruction is coal-related. Except for the weekly lecture on the history of Panem. It’s mostly a lot of blather about what we owe the Capitol. I know there must be more than they’re telling us, an actual account of what happened during the rebellion” (pp. 41-42). Katniss complains that her school’s curriculum serves really as an apprenticeship for one particular profession: coal mining. Panem expects most young people in District 12 to become the people that extract natural resources for the country. The only other education Katniss believes her school provides is propaganda that supports the Capitol. Katniss calls these lectures overly long, nonsensical claims that she and others are indebted to the Capitol. Katniss can see clearly that her community fails to provide adequate care, food, and education for its children.

# Mentors

When Peeta and Katniss become the District 12 tributes for the Hunger Games, the adults assigned to help them are anything but strong role models. When Peeta and Katniss meet their mentor, Haymitch (a former Hunger Games victor), he drunkenly slips in his own vomit. Katniss says: “For a few moments, Peeta and I take in the scene of our mentor trying to rise out of the slippery vile stuff from his stomach. The reek of vomit and raw spirits almost brings my dinner up…Peeta and I each take one of Haymitch’s arms and help him to his feet” (p. 48). Haymitch’s incapacitating drunkenness is especially disappointing under the current circumstances. Haymitch is the sole adviser to Katniss and Peeta in a life threatening competition. The teenagers have no other adult to consult regarding what they can expect in the Hunger Games arena. Katniss and Peeta witness Haymitch in a state of drunkenness, see him become sick, and then watch as he *tries *to regain his footing. The scene almost makes Katniss sick herself. In an ironic moment, the mentees Katniss and Peeta help their mentor, Haymitch, to his feet. Another adult, Effie Trinket, escorts Peeta and Katniss from District 12 to the Capitol. On the train on the way to the Capitol, Effie says to Peeta and Katniss, “At least, you two have decent manners…The pair last year ate everything with their hands like a couple of savages. It completely upset my digestion” (p. 44). Effie intends to offer Peeta and Katniss a compliment on their table manners. However, Effie’s comment on the way that Peeta and Katniss eat reveals her judgement of them, even as they face almost certain death in the Hunger Games. Her observation shows Katniss and Peeta that Effie remains detached and insensitive to their grave reality. Furthermore, Effie criticizes last year’s District 12 tributes. She calls them “savages,” because of their table manners, and describes her own physical revulsion of them. In the context of a country that forces children to battle to their deaths, Effie misplaces her disgust. Katniss and Peeta arrive at the Capitol and meet stylists that groom Katniss and Peeta in a way the Capitol believes makes them better entertainers. Katniss relates: “...Venia, a woman with aqua hair and gold tattoos above her eyebrows, yanks a strip of fabric from my leg…My legs, arms, torso, underarms, and parts of my eyebrows have been stripped of the stuff, leaving me like a plucked bird, ready for roasting. I don’t like it” (p. 61). In Venia, Katniss meets another adult whose role is to help Katniss, but who fully complies with Capitol culture. Venia makes Katniss feel like a “plucked bird, ready for roasting,” like an animal for others to consume. Venia changes Katniss’s appearance with no consideration for what Katniss wants. Haymitch, Effie, and Venia make up Katniss and Peeta’s supposed “team,” but Katniss and Peeta both know that none of these adults can spare them from their violent fate.

_The Hunger Games_ portrays a world where children suffer on a daily basis. The Hunger Games arena is an especially cruel place, but the children that author Suzanna Collins depicts are never safe. Katniss, Gale, and Peeta cannot rely on their own parents to properly care for them. Katniss and Gale do not have enough food at home. The two of them must not only find food for themselves, but for their mothers and siblings as well. Peeta’s mother beats him for small mistakes. The children cannot rely on the wider District 12 community to help them either. Health officials know that citizens, including children, starve to death, but do nothing to intervene and then lie about the cause of their deaths. The adults that manage the children’s home abuse the children there. Teachers at District 12 schools prepare the children for one profession only. The information that teachers give students about history and society remains biased in favor of the Capitol. In preparation for the Hunger Games, Katniss and Peeta learn quickly that they cannot fully trust the members of their intended support team. When Katniss and Peeta first meet Haymitch, he is so drunk he can stay on his feet. Effie judges Katniss and Peeta, and communicates immediately how little understanding she has of them. Venia follows Capitol instructions and turns Katniss into a person she doesn’t like. _The Hunger Games_ serves as an example of the many ways in which adults can fail children.

---
References

Collins, S. (2008). *The Hunger Games*. Scholastic Inc.
