---
layout: post
title: The Horror of Ignorance
book_author: Joseph Sheridan
categories: 16-18
image: carmilla.jpg
---

Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu’s 1871 novella, _Carmilla_, is ostensibly a vampire story. In the end however, simple ignorance proves to be the real plague that haunts the humans in the story. When Laura is around six years old, the vampire Carmilla appears to Laura for the first time (either in reality or in a dream, Laura isn’t sure). The experience traumatizes Laura. At nineteen, Laura encounters Carmilla again. Carmilla comes to stay with Laura and her father at their home, and during Carmilla’s stay, Laura becomes ill. As the story progresses, Laura illustrates how her ignorance makes her victimization inevitable. Laura allows Carmilla’s beauty to enchant her, which distracts Laura from Carmilla’s words and actions. Laura doesn’t believe she can be a victim in the first place, refuses to admit to her pain when she becomes a victim, and assumes only a passive role in her recovery. Laura’s naive thinking regarding Carmilla and herself is a product of her lack of education. Although her family possesses the means to educate her, she proves to have insufficient knowledge of topics that range from her own family history to the world. Laura’s shocking ignorance allows Carmilla to feed on Laura with ease. 

## Carmilla

Laura consistently fails to see Camilla’s true nature. The experience Laura has with Carmilla as a young girl terrifies her, and Laura remembers Carmilla’s face. Yet when grown Laura sees Carmilla again, Laura relates: “The truth is, I felt rather unaccountably towards the beautiful stranger. I did feel, as [Carmilla] said, ‘drawn towards her,’...[Carmilla] was so beautiful and so indescribably engaging…the unpleasant remembrance of the face presented in my early dream had lost the effect of the first unexpected recognition” (p. 30-31). Laura shows her lack of awareness regarding Carmilla when she confesses that she feels “unaccountably” towards Carmilla, and finds Carmilla “indescribably engaging.” Laura’s confession reveals that she cannot see through Carmilla’s charms. Laura simply repeats how beautiful she finds Carmilla, as Carmilla’s physical appearance seems to be the only quality Laura can grasp. Laura has the benefit of a previous encounter with Carmilla, but she does not learn from the experience. Laura admits that she recognizes Carmilla from her childhood, and that Carmilla’s reappearance initially makes her uncomfortable. However, Laura disregards her memories and instincts, and welcomes Carmilla into her life. Carmilla behaves strangely while she stays with Laura and her father. One day, Carmilla effectively tells Laura the truth about who she is, but Laura doesn’t understand. Carmilla says to Laura, “Do not think me cruel because I obey the irresistible law of my strength and weakness…I live in your warm life, and you shall die - die, sweetly die - into mine. I cannot help it; as I draw near to you, you, in your turn will draw near to others, and learn the rapture of that cruelty” (p. 35). Carmilla asks Laura to forgive her. She tells Laura she cannot help what she does, which is to feed on Laura’s blood. Carmilla says three times that Laura will die, and also become a vampire. Carmilla explains that in the same way she now feeds on Laura, Laura will feed on others, and come to enjoy the practice. When Carmilla tells Laura this, Laura relates: “Her agitations and her language were unintelligible to me” (p. 35). Laura thinks about Carmilla, “I often wondered whether our pretty guest ever said her prayers…Religion was a subject on which I had never heard [Carmilla] speak a word. If I had known the world better, this particular neglect or antipathy would not have so much surprised me” (p. 60). Carmilla’s avoidance of Christian behaviors such as prayer puzzles Laura because she takes her own family’s practices for granted, and believes that everyone must behave the way her family does. Laura does not realize that there are people, and vampires, in the world who do not practice Christianity as regularly as she does, or who do not practice Christianity at all. Carmilla’s behavior surprises Laura, but Laura cannot draw any conclusions. Laura squanders all of the information that she gains about Carmilla from Camilla’s own words and actions.

## Herself

Laura can neither rightly judge the predatory Carmilla, nor comprehend her own vulnerable self. Girls begin to get sick and die in the area where Laura lives, and Carmilla tells Laura about her affliction with the same illness in the past. Carmilla asks Laura if she feels afraid, and Laura answers: “I should be very much [afraid] if I fancied there was any real danger of my being attacked as those poor people were” (p. 47). Laura witnesses healthy girls around her wither and die. She learns that Carmilla has experience with this illness as well. Naively, Laura considers herself unlike Carmilla and the other girls. She believes the illness in the area cannot affect her because she is somehow different from the others. Laura _does _become ill, however. Laura eventually confesses, “Without knowing it, I was now in an advanced stage of the strangest illness…My father asked me often whether I was ill; but, with an obstinacy which now seems to me unaccountable, I persisted in assuring him that I was quite well” (pp. 68, 71). Only in hindsight does Laura describe her illness as “advanced,” and the “strangest.” At the time of her sickness, however, Laura does not want to admit that she feels unwell. Laura fails to recognize Carmilla’s affect on her at the time. Eventually, Laura’s father calls a doctor to see his daughter. Laura observes, “[My father] and the doctor talked for some time…Not a word could we hear, however…[later] Madame and I were both busy, lost in conjecture as to the reasons of the singular and earnest directions the doctor and my father had given us” (p. 82, 85). Laura’s father and doctor keep Laura uninformed about her health. The men talk exclusively with each other, and Laura does not press her father or the doctor for answers. Laura accepts this treatment from them and remains ignorant of the doctor’s conclusions. Instead, she wastes time with her governess and tries to guess about the doctor’s instructions for her. Before Laura becomes ill, while she is very ill, and when the doctor assesses her, Laura exhibits a complacent ignorance of herself.

## The World

Laura struggles to understand herself and others in part because she knows so little of the world in general. Her father arranges for someone to restore a collection of paintings their family owns, and when a messenger arrives back at their house with the pictures, Laura says, “I don’t know that the pictures were very good, but they were, undoubtedly, very old, and some of them very curious also. They had, for the most part, the merit of being now seen by me for the first time, for the smoke and dust of time had all but obliterated them…[one] was the effigy of Carmilla!” (p. 50). Laura has no knowledge about art in general or her family’s art collection, and thus cannot comment on the quality of the works. She shows an interest in the newly restored art simply because she is yet unfamiliar with these particular works of art. Laura only now sees that the painting labeled “Mircalla, Countess Karnstein, A.D. 1698,” looks exactly like Carmilla. The painting points to the reality that Carmilla and Mircalla are the same person, and that Carmilla is over one hundred and fifty years old. Frustratingly, however, Laura cannot make use of this piece of evidence. Laura already adores Carmilla and cannot register the truth. Later, Laura recounts a dream that she has: “...[a voice] said, ‘Your mother warns you to beware of the assassin.’...and I saw Carmilla standing near the foot of my bed in her white nightdress, bathed from her chin to her feet in one great stain of blood. I woke with a shriek, certain that Carmilla was being murdered” (p. 72). Again, Laura has the chance to see Carmilla for who she really is. Laura’s dream (the product of a supernatural intervention from Laura’s deceased mother, or Laura’s own subconscious), attempts to inform Laura that Carmilla is a killer, but Laura misunderstands the warning. She does not interpret Carmilla as the threat. Instead, Laura believes Carmilla to be in danger. Finally, Laura reveals that even many years later, after her experiences with Carmilla and her family’s discoveries about vampirism, she does not try to educate herself on the topic. Laura says of Baron Vordenburg: “He devoted himself to the minute and laborious investigation of the marvelously authenticated tradition of vampirism. He had at his fingers’ ends all the great and little works upon the subject…among which I remember only a few of those he lent to my father” (p. 136). Laura admits that ample documentation of vampirism exists. She also knows someone, Baron Vordenburg, who possesses a great deal of knowledge and literature about vampires. However, she makes no mention of any research of her own. Of Baron Vordenburg’s vast collection of sources, she remembers “only a few,” which reflects her disinterest in the material available to her. Laura mentions that Baron Vordenburg loans books to her _father_, as she herself only observes their correspondence, and does not participate in any kind of collaboration. Laura’s reflection on Baron Vordenburg illustrates her surprising detachment from a subject which so greatly affects her life. Throughout the story, Laura remains impervious to information that is available to her.

On the surface, the horror of Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu’s work, _Carmilla_, is the vampire who abuses the young woman Laura. The characters ultimately understand that Carmilla is a vampire, and take action to successfully destroy her. The underlying horror of La Fanu’s work, however, is the ignorance that makes Laura so susceptible to abuse. Laura regularly reveals her blindness to reality, and she never overcomes this weakness. Regarding other people, Laura shows how she does not learn from previous experiences, she does not listen when people reveal their true natures to her, and she ignores her instincts. Laura exhibits a similar lack of critical thinking about herself as well. She wrongly believes that she is immune to damage and death in the same way that other people are. When she does find herself a victim, she tries to ignore her symptoms and insists to those around her that she does not have a problem. When people help her, she does not advocate for herself, and assumes a passive role in her recovery. Laura’s lack of knowledge about her town and family history, allows Carmilla to enter into Laura’s life unnoticed. Because Laura does not have a developed understanding of the world, when she learns new pieces of information, she does not know what to do with the information - she does not have a schema to which she can add. Even after her ordeal with Carmilla, Laura does not feel the need to educate herself in order to protect herself against vampires in the future. Although the men in Laura’s life ultimately destroy Carmilla, everyone understands that other vampires still haunt the earth, and that even more continue to manifest. At the end of the story, Laura seems no more capable of life among vampires. 

---
References

Le Fanu, J.S. (2019).  _Carmilla_. Lanternfish Press. (Original work published 1871)
